

MindPapers is now part of PhilPapers: online research in philosophy, a new service with many more features. 

      
 

 Compiled by David Chalmers (Editor) & David Bourget (Assistant Editor), Australian National University. Submit an entry. 

     


Jump to   
 
Viewing options  
 
Tools  
 



































































































 


     
 


  
   All fields Surname       
   
 
 click here for help on how to search  
 

















 
  
Your browser is not configured for off-campus access. Click here to configure it.
 

  
 


1. Philosophy of Consciousness (Philosophy of Consciousness on PhilPapers)

1.1  Philosophy of Consciousness, Miscellaneous [295] 
  


1.1a  Philosophy of Consciousness, General Works [97] 
  


1.1b  The Concept of Consciousness [142] 
  


1.1c  Philosophy of Consciousness, Misc [51] 
  


1.2  Explaining Consciousness? [384] 
  


1.2a  What is it Like? [42] 
  


1.2b  Subjectivity and Objectivity [58] 
  


1.2c  The Explanatory Gap [88] 
  


1.2d  `Hard' and `Easy' Problems [82] 
  


1.2e  Cognitive Closure [32] 
  


1.2f  Conceptual Analysis and A Priori Entailment [32] 
  


1.2g  Explaining Consciousness, Misc [47] 
  


1.3  Consciousness and Materialism [598] 
  


1.3a  The Knowledge Argument [127] 
  


1.3b  Zombies and the Conceivability Argument [167] 
  


1.3c  Kripke's Modal Argument [48] 
  


1.3d  Arguments from Disembodiment [39] 
  


1.3e  Other Anti-Materialist Arguments [40] 
  


1.3f  Consciousness and Materialism, Misc [39] 
  


1.3g  Mind-Body Problem, General [135] 
  


1.4  Specific Views on Consciousness [669] 
  


1.4a  Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness [264] 
  


1.4a.1  Higher-Order Perception Theories of Consciousness [2] 
  


1.4a.2  Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness, Misc [3] 
  


1.4a.3  Higher-Order Thought Theories of Consciousness [162] 
  


1.4a.4  Self-Representational Theories of Consciousness [97] 
  


1.4b  Dennett's Functionalism [96] 
  


1.4c  Searle's Biological Naturalism [35] 
  


1.4d  Functionalism about Consciousness [19] 
  


1.4e  Eliminativism about Consciousness [23] 
  


1.4f  Dualism about Consciousness [40] 
  


1.4g  Panpsychism [101] 
  


1.4h  Russellian Monism [37] 
  


1.4i  Neutral Monism [30] 
  


1.4j  Idealism [24] 
  


1.4k  Specific Views on Consciousness, Misc [3] 
  


1.5  Consciousness and Content [541] 
  


1.5a  Consciousness and Intentionality [71] 
  


1.5b  Representationalism [221] 
  


1.5c  Phenomenal Intentionality [40] 
  


1.5d  Conscious Thought [24] 
  


1.5e  Internalism and Externalism about Experience [60] 
  


1.5f  Phenomenal Concepts [80] 
  


1.5g  Consciousness and Content, Misc [42] 
  


1.6  Aspects of Consciousness [680] 
  


1.6a  Self-Consciousness [175] 
  


1.6b  The Unity of Consciousness [124] 
  


1.6c  Homogeneity of Consciousness [15] 
  


1.6d  Knowledge of Consciousness [65] 
  


1.6e  The Function of Consciousness [60] 
  


1.6f  Temporal Consciousness [131] 
  


1.6g  Consciousness of Action [67] 
  


1.6h  Unconscious States [40] 
  


1.6i  Collective Consciousness [0] 
  


1.6j  Aspects of Consciousness, Misc [1] 
  


1.7  Qualia [377] 
  


1.7a  Qualia, Misc [46] 
  


1.7b  Qualia and Materialism [26] 
  


1.7c  Eliminativism about Qualia [22] 
  


1.7d  The Inverted Spectrum [89] 
  


1.7e  Absent Qualia [40] 
  


1.7f  Functionalism and Qualia [31] 
  

See also:
8  Science of Consciousness 
  





Alexander, Ian W. (1985). French Literature and the Philosophy of Consciousness: Phenomenological Essays. St. Martin's Press.   (Google) 
 
Bremer, Manuel (2005). Lessons from Sartre for the Analytic Philosophy of Mind. Analecta Husserliana 88:63-85.   (Google)
Abstract: There are positive and negative lessons from Sartre: - Taking up some of his ideas one may arrive at a better model of consciousness in the analytic philosophy of mind; representing some of his ideas within the language and the models of a functionalist theory of mind makes them more accessible and inte¬grates them into the wider picture. - Sartre, as any philosopher, errs at some points, I believe; but these errors may be instruc¬tive, especially in as much as they mirror some errors in some current theories of consciousness. This paper, therefore, is not a piece of Sartre scholarship, but an attempt of a “friendly take¬over” of some ideas I ascribe to Sartre into current models in the philosophy of mind. 
 
Dietrich, Eric, A connecticut yalie in King Descartes' court.   (Google)
Abstract: What is consciousness? Of course, each of us knows, privately, what consciousness is. And we each think, for basically irresistible reasons, that all other conscious humans by and large have experiences like ours. So we conclude that we all know what consciousness is. It's the felt experiences of our lives. But that is not the answer we, as cognitive scientists, seek in asking our question. We all want to know what physical process consciousness is and why it produces this very strange, almost mysterious, phenomenon of felt experience
 
Dziuban, Peter Francis (2006). Consciousness is All: Now Life is Completely New. Blue Dolphin Pub..   (Google)
Abstract: It really is true -- Fact : there is nothing greater than consciousness -- Consciousness is what you are -- Aliveness -- Fact : consciousness is the infinite itself -- Consciousness is not the "human mind" -- Whose life is it, anyway? -- The all-inclusiveness of consciousness -- To be God, God has to be -- Consciousness is neither physical nor metaphysical -- There is only one consciousness -- Consciousness is -- Fact : consciousness is what the present is -- Check the credentials -- Cease ye from man -- Once upon a time -- How much distance or depth is there to a dream? -- The immediacy of all -- The spectrum of what isn't -- Love is what existence is -- Consciousness cannot ignore its own presence -- The present is all that is present -- Time is not continuous -- The present is perfection itself -- The infinite one -- I am not a duplex -- Now is undelayable -- Ideas cannot withhold themselves -- What is a statement of truth? -- You cannot be limited -- Majestic awareness -- Peace.
 
Güzeldere, Güven (1997). The many faces of consciousness: A field guide. In Ned Block, Owen Flanagan & Güven Güzeldere (eds.), The Nature of Consciousness: Philosophical Debates. The Mit Press.   (Google) 
 
Hennig, Boris (2006). Conscientia bei Descartes. Alber Verlag.   (Google)
Abstract: Although Descartes is often said to have coined the modern notion of 'consciousness', he nowhere defines the according Latin term (conscientia), neither explicitly nor implicitly. This may either imply that he used the word in a sense that he did not make sufficiently clear, that he was not the first to use 'conscientia' in its modern psychological sense, or that he still used it in its traditional sense. I argue for the third assumption: Descartes used 'conscientia' according to the traditional meaning that we also find in the writings of St. Paul, Augustine, Aquinas and later scholastics. Thus for Descartes, conscientia is not a kind of speculative self-knowledge, inner observation or reflexive awareness. Rather, it is a kind of practical knowledge. This is a bold claim. I will argue for it (1) by closely examining the key passages in the Cartesian writings and (2) by re-evaluating the traditional use of the Latin 'conscientia'. Then I will (3) draw some consequences. 1. Descartes makes rather clear what consciousness (conscientia) is not. To take only the most likely candidates. Consciousness is not a thought (cogitatio), since every thought must be accompanied by consciousness. Further, it is not a disposition. Descartes claims that the object of our consciousness never is a possible, but always must be an actual thought. It would be difficult to see how a disposition could be about an actual thought rather than a possible one. But consciousness is also not an attribute of a thought, since Descartes always ascribes it to the thinker herself. 2. In classical and mediaeval Latin, 'conscientia' did not mean 'consciousness', but also not exactly the same as 'moral conscience'. Three aspects are involved in the traditional meaning of the term. First, conscientia is shared knowledge. At least since Augustine, this knowledge is said to be shared between particular human agents and God. Second, conscientia concerns the specific (moral) value of an action. Even more, as Aquinas maintains, actions acquire their rationality and normativity only by being subject to conscientia. On this basis, later scholastics thirdly defined conscientia as a kind of practical knowledge. As such, conscientia is in some sense the cause of what it understands. Put in late scholastic terms, it is the formal cause of its moral being (esse morale). This account of the meaning of 'conscientia' will be shown to be largely compatible with the Cartesian use of the term; the only change to be made being that it deals with thoughts (cogitationes) and their specific value rather than with actions. Hence for Descartes, consciousness is a kind of practical knowledge about thoughts that is shared with an ideal observer (God) and that causes the specific value of the thought that is its object. 3. This reading has several important implications. For instance, it provides us with a reason for the claim that the consciousness is not itself a thought of the thinker who has it. Our the consciousness turns something into a thought by taking it as its object and thereby endowing it with the specific value that it has as a thought. This value might be truth, correctness, adequacy or something along these lines. Now every particular judgment of value can itself be false, incorrect, or inadequate. Hence, every particular reflexive thought would itself be subject to a further consciousness. The only conscientia that can stop this regress is Gods knowledge of our thoughts. This knowledge cannot be wrong. As a consequence, the suggested reading directs us away from the assumption that the mind contains only incorporeal thoughts that are privately known to the thinker. As for the first, Descartes himself claims that most of our thoughts depend on the body. The object of our consciousness may then be some event happening in our brain. Consciousness turns this event into something that is also in some respect incorporeal by endowing it with a value. As thought, it is then not a mere corporeal thing. (The modern reader may add: as thought, but not as bodily event, it is equivalent with other brain events.) As for the second part of the above claim, the Cartesian mind must be radically public, since we always share our conscientia with an ideal observer. Finally, we come to see why Descartes proceeds so easily from his cogito, sum to a proof of the existence of God. Since every thought must be subject to a conscientia, there must always have been an ideal observer. God's existence can be shown because it must already have been presupposed. In fact, the Cartesian meditator was never alone.
 
Hohwy, Jakob, Consciousness (.   (Google)
Abstract: Consciousness. We have come to expect science to be able to explain all sorts of phenomena in the world (global warming, hereditary diseases, life – you name it). Consciousness is an anomaly in the success story of science for there is a real question whether science, in particular neuroscience, can explain much about what consciousness is. A good question to ask is how and to what extent consciousness resists scientific explanation. That might tell us something about what is special about consciousness
 
Jacquette, Dale (2009). The Philosophy of Mind: The Metaphysics of Consciousness. Continuum.   (Google) 
 
Kadane, Joseph B.; Schervish, Mark & Seidenfield, Teddy (2008). Is ignorance Bliss? Journal of Philosophy 105 (1):5-36.   (Google | More links) 







 
Kauffmann, Oliver (2004). Superblindsight, inverse Anton, and tweaking a-consciousness further. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 27 (2):290-294.   (Google)
Abstract: It is argued that Block's thought experiment on superblindsight and “the Inverse Anton's syndrome” are not cases of A-consciousness without P-consciousness. “Weak dispositional states” should be excluded from the set of A-conscious states, and a subject's being reflectively conscious of a P-conscious state is suggested as a better candidate for A-consciousness. It is further pointed out that dreams, according to Block's own criterion but contrary to what he claims, are A-unconscious and it is argued that Block should not accept the idea that high-information representational content is an empirically sufficient condition of phenomenality in human beings
 
Kirk, Robert (1994). Raw Feeling. Clarendon Press.   (Google) 
 
Lau, Hakwan (2008). Are we studying consciousness yet? In Lawrence Weiskrantz & Martin Davies (eds.), Frontiers of Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: It has been over a decade and half since Christof Koch and the late Francis Crick first advocated the now popular NCC project (Crick and Koch, 1990), in which one tries to find the neural correlate of consciousness (NCC) for perceptual processes. In his chapter in this book Chris Frith provides a splendid review of how neuroimaging has contributed greatly to this project. For the sake of contrast, this chapter takes a more critical stance on what we have actually learned. Many authors have written on whether looking for the neural correlates would eventually lead to an explanatory theory of consciousness, while the proponents defend that focusing on correlates is a strategically sensible first step, given the complexity of the problem (Crick and Koch, 1998;Crick and Koch, 2003). My point here is not to argue whether studying the NCC is useful, but rather, to question whether we are really studying the NCC at all. I argue that in hoping to sidestep the difficult conceptual issues, we have sometimes also missed the phenomenon of perceptual consciousness itself





 
Levine, Joseph (2001). Purple Haze. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Lähteenmäki, Vili (2010). Cudworth on Types of Consciousness. British Journal for the History of Philosophy 18 (1):9-34.   (Google) 
 
Marbaniang, Domenic (2009). Philosophy of Science: An Introduction. Google Books.   (Google)
Abstract: Science has its beginning points and ending points in theoretical and practical philosophy. This little book gives a brief introduction to the philosophical issues involved in doing science by illustrating the issues under the classical divisions: Epistemology of Science, Scientific Metaphysics, and Ethics of Science. The book is for beginners.
 
Merrell-Wolff, Franklin (1973). The Philosophy of Consciousness Without an Object. New York,Julian Press.   (Google) 
 
Moreland, James Porter (2008). Consciousness and the Existence of God: A Theistic Argument. Routledge.   (Google)
Abstract: The epistemic backdrop for locating consciousness in a naturalist ontology -- The argument from consciousness -- John Searle and contingent correlation -- Timothy O'Connor and emergent necessitation -- Colin McGinn and mysterian ?naturalism? -- David Skrbina and panpsychism -- Philip Clayton and pluralistic emergentist monism -- Science and strong physicalism -- AC, dualism and the fear of god.
 
Schier, Elizabeth, Our intuitions about consciousness are inconsistent.   (Google)
Abstract:  Introduce the intuitions  Accepting that there is no appearance/reality distinction for consciousness means we must deny that consciousness does causal work..
 
Scott, William Henry (1918). Consciousness and self-consciousness. Philosophical Review 27 (1):1-20.   (Google | More links) 




 
Smithies, Declan (2006). Rationality and the Subject's Point of View. Dissertation, New York University   (Google) 
 
Stieg, Chuck (2009). Is phenomenal consciousness a complex structure? Cogprints 51 (4):152-61.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Evolutionary explanations of psychological phenomena have become widespread. This paper examines a recent attempt by Nichols and Grantham (2000) to circumvent the problem of epiphenomenalism in establishing the selective status of consciousness. Nichols and Grantham (2000) argue that a case can be made for the view that consciousness is an adaptation based on its complexity. I set out this argument and argue that it fails to establish that phenomenal consciousness is a complex system. It is suggested that the goal of establishing consciousness as an adaptation may be better served by rejecting the distinction between access consciousness and phenomenal consciousness







 
Stoljar, Daniel, Consciousness.   (Google)
Abstract: Consciousness is extremely familiar yet it is at the limits—beyond the limits, some would say—of what one can sensibly talk about or explain. Perhaps this is the reason its study has drawn contributions from many fields including psychology, neuroscience, philosophy, anthropology, cultural and literary theory, artificial intelligence, physics, and others. The focus of this entry is on: the varieties of consciousness, different problems that have been raised about these varieties, and prospects for progress on these problems
 
Stoljar, Daniel (2003). Introduction. In Peter Ludlow, Yujin Nagasawa & Daniel Stoljar (eds.), There's Something About Mary. The Mit Press.   (Google)
Abstract: Mary is confined to a black-and-white room, is educated through black-and-white books and through lectures relayed on black-and white television. In this way she learns everything there is to know about the physical nature of the world. She knows all the physical facts about us and our environment, in a wide sense of 'physical' which includes everything in completed physics, chemistry, and neurophysiology, and all there is to know about the causal and relational facts consequent upon all this, including of course functional roles. If physicalism is true, she knows all there is to know. For to suppose otherwise is to suppose that there is more to know than every physical fact, and that is just what physicalism denies. … It seems, however, that Mary does not know all there is to know. For when she is let out of the black-and- white room or given a color television, she will learn what it is like to see something red, say. This is rightly described as learning—she will not say “ho, hum.” Hence, physicalism is false. (Jackson 1986, p. 291, Chapter 2, this volume)
 
Sytsma, Justin, Is phenomenal consciousness a problem for the brain sciences?   (Google)
Abstract: Phenomenal consciousness poses a puzzle for philosophy of science. This arises from two facts: It is common for philosophers (and some scientists) to take its existence to be phenomenologically obvious and yet modern science arguably has little (if anything) to say about it. And, this despite 20 years of work targeting the phenomenon in what I will refer to as the new science of consciousness. How has such a supposedly evident part of our world remained beyond our scientific understanding? One possibility is that there is no such phenomenon. This possibility, however, is undercut by the claim that phenomenal consciousness is phenomenologically obvious. In this paper I argue that this claim is mistaken. Distinguishing between the qualities we are phenomenologically aware of and the classification of those qualities as being mental (as qualia), I present both empirical evidence and theoretical reasons to deny that the latter is phenomenologically obvious
 
Tallis, Raymond (1991). The Explicit Animal: A Defence of Human Consciousness. Macmillan Academic and Professional.   (Google) 
 
Weir, Archibald (1932). Light: A Philosophy of Consciousness ; Sequel to "the Dark". Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
1.1 Philosophy of Consciousness, Miscellaneous




Beavers, Anthony F. (2009). The phenomenological mind: An introduction to philosophy of mind and cognitive science. Philosophical Psychology 22 (4):533 – 537.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The Phenomenological Mind, by Shaun Gallagher and Dan Zahavi, is part of a recent initiative to show that phenomenology, classically conceived as the tradition inaugurated by Edmund Husserl and not as mere introspection, contributes something important to cognitive science. (For other examples, see “References” below.) Phenomenology, of course, has been a part of cognitive science for a long time. It implicitly informs the works of Andy Clark (e.g. 1997) and John Haugeland (e.g. 1998), and Hubert Dreyfus explicitly uses it (e.g. 1992). But where the former use phenomenology in the background as broad context and Dreyfus uses it primarily (though not exclusively) as a critique of conventional AI, Gallagher and Zahavi wish to indicate a positive and constructive place for it within cognitive science. They do not recommend that we simply accept pronouncements of thinkers like Husserl, Heidegger, Sartre and Merleau‐Ponty and apply them to questions of cognition, but that we use revised forms of phenomenology to illuminate dimensions of cognitive experience that are missing in current research. The book is presented as an “introduction to philosophy of mind and cognitive science” written from a phenomenological perspective. It seeks to justify the use of phenomenology in cognitive science by showing what kinds of questions it asks and answers, the variety of uses to which it has recently been put and the fruitfulness of some of its findings. The catalog of topics, for the most part, matches other introductions to the philosophy of mind, such as questions of method, consciousness, perception, intentionality, embodiment, action, agency and other minds. One issue presented here that is not generally dealt with in existing philosophy of mind and cognitive science texts is temporality, a mainstay of the continental tradition. After an introductory chapter that places phenomenology in the context of other approaches, the book lays out the main tenets of phenomenological method. Here, one encounters expected components of phenomenology: the epoché (described below), phenomenological reduction, eidetic variation, and so on. This traditional fare is soon followed by some potential surprises, namely, attempts to “naturalize” phenomenology, a few attempts to formalize it, and the emergence of ‘neurophenomenology’. Each of these is a bit surprising because Husserl was a vocal critic of naturalism, seeing transcendental phenomenology as an alternative to the empirical study of consciousness. He was also skeptical about the possibilities of mathematizing phenomenology. Gallagher and Zahavi acknowledge these points, but since they are not repeating history or undertaking exegesis, strict adherence to canonical phenomenology is not required. Naturalizing phenomenology means recognizing that “the phenomena it studies are part of nature and are therefore also open to empirical investigation” (p..





 
Block, Ned (1999). Ridiculing social constructivism about phenomenal consciousness. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22 (1):199-201.   (Google)
Abstract: Money is a cultural construction, leukemia is not. In which category does phenomenal consciousness fit? The issue is clarified by a distinction between what cultural phenomena causally influence and what culture constitutes. Culture affects phenomenal consciousness but it is ridiculous to suppose that culture constitutes it, even in part
 
Caruso, Gregg (2008). Consciousness and Free Will: A Critique of the Argument from Introspection. Southwest Philosophy Review 24 (1):219-231.   (Google)
Abstract: One of the main libertarian arguments in support of free will is the argument from introspection. This argument places a great deal of faith in our conscious feeling of freedom and our introspective abilities. People often infer their own freedom from their introspective phenomenology of freedom. It is here argued that from the fact that I feel myself free, it does not necessarily follow that I am free. I maintain that it is our mistaken belief in the transparency and infallibility of consciousness that gives the introspective argument whatever power it possesses. Once we see that consciousness is neither transparent nor infallible, the argument from introspection loses all of its force. I argue that since we do not have direct, infallible access to our own minds, to rely on introspection to infer our own freedom would be a mistake.
 
Ellis, Ralph D. (1999). Why isn't consciousness empirically observable? Emotion, self-organization, and nonreductive physicalism. Journal of Mind and Behavior 20 (4):391-402.   (Google) 
 
Nadler, Steven (2008). Spinoza and consciousness. Mind 117 (467).   (Google)
Abstract: Most discussions of Spinoza and consciousness—and there are not many— conclude either that he does not have an account of consciousness, or that he does have one but that it is at best confused, at worst hopeless. I argue, in fact, that people have been looking in the wrong place for Spinoza's account of consciousness, namely, at his doctrine of "ideas of ideas". Indeed, Spinoza offers the possibility of a fairly sophisticated, naturalistic account of consciousness, one that grounds it in the nature and capacities of the body. Consciousness for Spinoza, I suggest, is a certain complexity in thinking that is the correlate of the complexity of a body, and human consciousness, for Spinoza, is nothing but the correlate in Thought of the extraordinarily high complexity of the human body in Extension. In this respect, Spinoza anticipates the conception of mind that is presently emerging from studies in the so-called embodied mind research program. Moreover, this research program, in turn, may hold out hope for a clearer understanding of some of Spinoza's more difficult claims. CiteULike    Connotea    Del.icio.us    What's this?
 
1.1a Philosophy of Consciousness, General Works




Armstrong, David M. & Malcolm, Norman (1984). Consciousness and Causality: A Debate on the Nature of Mind. Blackwell.   (Cited by 110 | Google) 
 
Barlingay, S. S. (1976). Awareness. Indian Philosophical Quarterly 4 (October):83-96.   (Google) 
 
Block, Ned (forthcoming). Consciousness. In T. Bayne, A. Cleeremans & P. Wilken (eds.), Oxford Companion to Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 27 | Google) 
 
Block, Ned (2003). Philosophical issues about consciousness. In L. Nadel (ed.), Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science. Nature Publishing Group.   (Google) 
 
Block, Ned; Flanagan, Owen J. & Guzeldere, Guven (eds.) (1997). The Nature of Consciousness: Philosophical Debates. MIT Press.   (Cited by 116 | Annotation | Google)




  
Block, Ned (2007). Consciousness, Function, and Representation: Collected Papers, Volume. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Catalano, Joseph S. (2000). Thinking Matter: Consciousness From Aristotle to Putnam and Sartre. Routledge.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Chalmers, David J. (2003). Consciousness and its place in nature. In Stephen P. Stich & Ted A. Warfield (eds.), Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of Mind. Blackwell.   (Cited by 49 | Google | More links) 





 
Chatterjee, Amita (ed.) (2003). Perspectives on Consciousness. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.   (Google) 
 
Chalmers, David J. (1999). Precis of The Conscious Mind. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 59 (2):435-438.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Chalmers, David J. (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 2089 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 












 
Churchland, Paul M. & Churchland, Patricia S. (2003). Recent work on consciousness: Philosophical, theoretical, and empirical. In Naoyuki Osaka (ed.), Neural Basis of Consciousness. Amsterdam: J Benjamins.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 




 
Corkum, Phil (forthcoming). Attention, Perception and Thought in Aristotle. Dialogue.   (Google) 
 
Davies, Martin & Humphreys, Glyn W. (1993). Consciousness: Philosophical and Psychological Essays. Blackwell.   (Cited by 26 | Annotation | Google)




  
Dennett, Daniel C. (2001). Consciousness: How much is that in real money? In Richard L. Gregory (ed.), Oxford Companion to the Mind. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Dittrich, W. H. (1999). More mysteries about consciousness? Book review of Davies & Humphreys on consciousness. [Journal (Paginated)].   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This commentary is a plea to re-read after five years one, as it seems, almost forgotten book which has nevertheless clearly influenced the development of empirical approaches to consciousness. The book provides an illuminating look at the early period to the modern revival of consciousness research. Its subtitle 'Psychological and Philosophical Essays' describes the book's range precisely. Early attempts to disect the mystery of consciousness and many themes that are still preoccupying modern consciousness research are covered. While some areas of research have been progressed, theoretical views have not changed dramatically, and this book still seems a good guide to embark on a mysterious journey when exploring consciousness





 
Flanagan, Owen J. (1991). Consciousness. In Owen J. Flanagan (ed.), The Science of the Mind. MIT Press.   (Cited by 4 | Annotation | Google)




  
Flanagan, Owen J. & Guzeldere, Guven (1997). Consciousness: A philosophical tour. In M. Ito, Y. Miyashita & Edmund T. Rolls (eds.), Cognition, Computation, and Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Flanagan, Owen J. (1992). Consciousness Reconsidered. MIT Press.   (Cited by 413 | Annotation | Google)




  
Foss, Jeffrey E. (2000). Science and the Riddle of Consciousness: A Solution. Kluwer Academic Publishers.   (Cited by 25 | Google)
Abstract: The questions examined in the book speak directly to neuroscientists, computer scientists, psychologists, and philosophers.
 
Gennaro, Rocco J. (online). Consciousness. Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.   (Google) 
 
Gray, Jeffrey A. (1995). Consciousness: What is the problem and how should it be addressed? Journal of Consciousness Studies 2 (1):5-9.   (Google) 
 
Gray, Richard (2003). Recent work on consciousness. International Journal of Philosophical Studies 11 (1):101-107.   (Google) 
 
Gregory, Richard L. (1988). Consciousness in science and philosophy: Conscience and con-science. In Anthony J. Marcel & E. Bisiach (eds.), Consciousness in Contemporary Science. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Guzeldere, Guven (1995). Consciousness: What it is, how to study it, what to learn from its history. Journal of Consciousness Studies 2 (1):30-51.   (Cited by 7 | Annotation | Google)




  
Guzeldere, Guven (1995). Problems of consciousness: A perspective on contemporary issues, current debates. Journal of Consciousness Studies 2:112-43.   (Cited by 9 | Annotation | Google)




  
Hannay, Alastair (1990). Human Consciousness. Routledge.   (Cited by 7 | Google) 
 
Hannay, Alastair (1987). The claims of consciousness: A critical survey. Inquiry 30 (December):395-434.   (Google) 
 
Heinämaa, Sara; Lähteenmäki, Vili & Remes, Pauliina (2007). Consciousness: From Perception to Reflection in the History of Philosophy. Springer.   (Google) 
 
Hill, Christopher S. (2009). Consciousness. Cambridge University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: This book provides a comprehensive and novel theory of consciousness. In clear and non-technical language, Christopher Hill provides interrelated accounts of six main forms of consciousness - agent consciousness, propositional consciousness (consciousness that), introspective consciousness, relational consciousness (consciousness of), experiential consciousness, and phenomenal consciousness. He develops the representational theory of mind in new directions, showing in detail how it can be used to undercut dualistic accounts of mental states. In addition he offers original and stimulating discussions of a range of psychological phenomena, including visual awareness, pain, emotional qualia, and introspection. His important book will interest a wide readership of students and scholars in philosophy of mind and cognitive science
 
Honderich, Ted (2004). On Consciousness. Edinburgh University Press.   (Cited by 15 | Google) 
 
Hurley, Susan L. (1998). Consciousness in Action. Harvard University Press.   (Cited by 296 | Google | More links) 




 
Hurley, Susan L. (online). Precis of Consciousness in Action.   (Google) 
 
Jackson, Frank (2005). Consciousness. In Frank Jackson & Michael Smith (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Contemporary Philosophy. New York: Oxford University Press New York.   (Google) 
 
Jackendoff, Ray S. (1987). Consciousness and the Computational Mind. MIT Press.   (Cited by 612 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Jarvilehto, Timo (online). New directions for consciousness research?   (Google) 
 
Jaynes, Julian (1982). The problem of consciousness. In H. Mifflin (ed.), The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind.   (Google) 
 
Josephson, B. D. & Ramachandran, V. S. (eds.) (1980). Consciousness and the Physical World: Edited Proceedings of an Interdisciplinary Symposium on Consciousness Held at the University of Cambridge in January 1978. Pergamon Press.   (Google) 
 
Kirk, Robert E. (1994). Raw Feeling: A Philosophical Account of the Essence of Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 48 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Kriegel, Uriah (2006). Theories of consciousness. Philosophy Compass 1 (1):58-64.   (Google | More links) 





 
Kriegel, Uriah (2006). Philosophical theories of consciousness: Contemporary western perspectives. In Morris Moscovitch, Evan Thompson & P. Zelazo (eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Consciousness. Cambridge University Press.   (Google) 
 
Levine, Joseph (1997). Recent work on consciousness. American Philosophical Quarterly 34 (4):379-404.   (Cited by 9 | Google) 
 
Livingston, Paul M. (2004). Philosophical History and the Problem of Consciousness. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The problem of explaining consciousness today depends on the meaning of language: the ordinary language of consciousness in which we define and express our sensations, thoughts, dreams and memories. Paul Livingston argues that this contemporary problem arises from a quest that developed over the twentieth century, and that historical analysis provides new resources for understanding and resolving it. Accordingly, Livingston traces the application of characteristic practices of analytic philosophy to problems about the relationship of experience to linguistic meaning













 
Lloyd, Dan (2004). Radiant Cool: A Novel Theory of Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
Lormand, Eric (1996). Consciousness. In Edward Craig (ed.), Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Routledge.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Lormand, Eric (online). Steps toward a science of consciousness?   (Google) 
 
Lycan, William G. (1987). Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Cited by 187 | Google | More links) 






 
Lycan, William G. (1996). Consciousness and Experience. MIT Press.   (Cited by 346 | Google) 
 
McGinn, Colin (2004). Consciousness and Its Objects. Oxford University Press University Press.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Colin McGinn presents his latest work on consciousness in ten interlinked papers, four of them previously unpublished. He extends and deepens his controversial solution to the mind-body problem, defending the view that consciousness is both ontologically unproblematic and epistemologically impenetrable. He also investigates the basis of our knowledge that there is a mind-body problem, and the bearing of this on attempted solutions. McGinn goes on to discuss the status of first-person authority, the possibility of atomism with respect to consciousness, extreme dualism, and the role of non-existent objects in constituting intentionality. He argues that traditional claims about our knowledge of our own mind and of the external world can be inverted; that atomism about the conscious mind might turn out to be true; that dualism is more credible the more extreme it is; and that all intentionality involves non-existent objects. These are all surprising positions, but he contends that what the philosophy of mind needs now is 'methodological radicalism' - a willingness to consider new and seemingly extravagant ideas








 
Metzinger, Thomas (ed.) (1995). Conscious Experience. Ferdinand Schoningh.   (Cited by 66 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: The contributions to this book are original articles, representing a cross-section of current philosophical work on consciousness and thereby allowing students and readers from other disciplines to acquaint themselves with the very latest debate, so that they can then pursue their own research interests more effectively. The volume includes a bibliography on consciousness in philosophy, cognitive science and brain research, covering the last 25 years and consisting of over 1000 entries in 18 thematic sections, compiled by David Chalmers and Thomas Metzinger






 
Metzinger, Thomas (1985). The problem of consciousness. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Imprint Academic.   (Cited by 19 | Google) 
 
Minsky, Marvin L. (2006). Consciousness. In Marvin L. Minsky (ed.), The Emotion Machine. Simon & Schuster.   (Google) 
 
Murata, Junichi (1997). Consciousness and the mind-body problem. In M. Ito, Y. Miyashita & Edmund T. Rolls (eds.), Cognition, Computation, and Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Nelkin, Norton (1996). Consciousness and the Origins of Thought. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 13 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This book offers a comprehensive and broadly rationalist theory of the mind which continually tests itself against experimental results and clinical data. Taking issue with Empiricists who believe that all knowledge arises from experience and that perception is a non-cognitive state, Norton Nelkin argues that perception is cognitive, constructive, and proposition-like. Further, as against Externalists who believe that our thoughts have meaning only insofar as they advert to the world outside our minds, he argues that meaning is determined 'in the head'. Finally, he offers an account of how we acquire some of our most basic concepts, including the concept of the self and that of other minds








 
O'Shaughnessy, Brian (2000). Consciousness and the World. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 26 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Brian O'Shaughnessy puts forward a bold and original theory of consciousness, one of the most fascinating but puzzling aspects of human existence. He analyzes consciousness into purely psychological constituents, according pre-eminence to epistemological properties. The result is an integrated picture of the conscious mind in its natural physical setting





 
Papineau, David (2000). Introducing Consciousness. Totem Books.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Papineau, David (2002). Thinking About Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 101 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The relation between subjective consciousness and the physical brain is widely regarded as the last mystery facing science. Papineau argues that consciousness seems mysterious not because of any hidden essence, but only because we think about it in a special way. He exposes the resulting potential for confusion, and shows that much scientific study of consciousness is misconceived





 
Papineau, David (2003). Theories of consciousness. In Quentin Smith & Aleksandar Jokic (eds.), Consciousness: New Philosophical Essays. Oxford: Clarendon Press.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 





 
Perry, John (2001). Knowledge, Possibility, and Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Cited by 72 | Google | More links) 





 
Prather, Alfred G. B. (2005). Philosophy Theory and Structure of Consciousness (Part I and Part II). Kearney: Morris Publ.   (Google) 
 
Raymont, Paul (ms). Conscious Unity.   (Google) 
 
Revonsuo, Antti & Kamppinen, Matti (eds.) (1994). Consciousness in Philosophy and Cognitive Neuroscience. Lawrence Erlbaum.   (Cited by 40 | Google)
Abstract: Consciousness seems to be an enigmatic phenomenon: it is difficult to imagine how our perceptions of the world and our inner thoughts, sensations and feelings could be related to the immensely complicated biological organ we call the brain. This volume presents the thoughts of some of the leading philosophers and cognitive scientists who have recently participated in the discussion of the status of consciousness in science. The focus of inquiry is the question: "Is it possible to incorporate consciousness into science?" Philosophers have suggested different alternatives -- some think that consciousness should be altogether eliminated from science because it is not a real phenomenon, others that consciousness is a real, higher-level physical or neurobiological phenomenon, and still others that consciousness is fundamentally mysterious and beyond the reach of science. At the same time, however, several models or theories of the role of conscious processing in the brain have been developed in the more empirical cognitive sciences. It has been suggested that non-conscious processes must be sharply separated from conscious ones, and that the necessity of this distinction is manifested in the curious behavior of certain brain-damaged patients. This book demonstrates the dialogue between philosophical and empirical points of view. The writers present alternative solutions to the brain-consciousness problem and they discuss how the unification of biological and psychological sciences could thus become feasible. Covering a large ground, this book shows how the philosophical and empirical problems are closely interconnected. From this interdisciplinary exploration emerges the conviction that consciousness can and should be a natural part of our scientific world view
 
Robinson, William S. (2004). Understanding Phenomenal Consciousness. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 11 | Google | More links)
Abstract: William S. Robinson has for many years written insightfully about the mind-body problem. In Understanding Phenomenal Consciousness he focuses on sensory experience (eg, pain, afterimages) and perception qualities such as colors, sounds and odors to present a dualistic view of the mind, called Qualitative Event Realism, that goes against the dominant materialist views. This theory is relevant to the development of a science of consciousness which is now being pursued not only by philosophers but by researchers in psychology and the brain sciences. This provocative book will interest students and professionals who work in the philosophy of mind and will also have cross-disciplinary appeal in cognitive psychology and the brain sciences











 
Rogers, A. K. (1920). Some recent theories of consciousness. Mind 29 (115):294-312.   (Google | More links) 





 
Rosenberg, Gregg H. (2004). A Place for Consciousness: Probing the Deep Structure of the Natural World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 43 | Google | More links)
Abstract: What place does consciousness have in the natural world? If we reject materialism, could there be a credible alternative? In one classic example, philosophers ask whether we can ever know what is it is like for bats to sense the world using sonar. It seems obvious to many that any amount of information about a bat's physical structure and information processing leaves us guessing about the central questions concerning the character of its experience. A Place for Consciousness begins with reflections on the existence of this gap. Is it just a psychological shortcoming in our merely human understanding of the physical world? Is it a trivial consequence of the simple fact that we just cannot be bats? Or does it mean there really are facts about consciousness over and above the physical facts? If so, what does consciousness do? Why does it exist? Rosenberg sorts out these problems, especially those centering on the causal role of consciousness. He introduces a new paradigm called Liberal Naturalism for thinking about what causation is, about the natural world, and about how to create a detailed model to go along with the new paradigm. Arguing that experience is part of the categorical foundations of causality, he shows that within this new paradigm there is a place for something essentially like consciousness in all its traditional mysterious respects. A striking feature of Liberal Naturalism is that its central tenets are motivated independently of the mind-body problem, by analyzing causation itself. Because of this approach, when consciousness shows up in the picture it is not introduced in an ad hoc way, and its most puzzling features can be explained from first principles. Ultimately, Rosenberg's final solution gives consciousness a causally important role without supposing either that it is physical or that it interacts with the physical





 
Rosenthal, David M. (2002). Consciousness and the mind. Jerusalem Philosophical Quarterly 51 (July):227-251.   (Google) 
 
Rowlands, Mark (2001). The Nature of Consciousness. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 12 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In The Nature of Consciousness, Mark Rowlands develops an innovative and radical account of the nature of phenomenal consciousness, one that has significant consequences for attempts to find a place for it in the natural order. The most significant feature of consciousness is its dual nature: consciousness can be both the directing of awareness and that upon which awareness is directed. Rowlands offers a clear and philosophically insightful discussion of the main positions in this fast-moving debate, and argues that the phenomenal aspects of conscious experience are aspects that exist only in the directing of experience towards non-phenomenal objects, a theory that undermines reductive attempts to explain consciousness in terms of what is not conscious. His book will be of interest to a wide range of readers in the philosophy of mind and language, psychology, and cognitive science









 
Sahu, Gopal (2002). Multi-disciplinary research on consciousness: What philosophy can do. Journal of Indian Council of Philosophical Research 19 (1):179-186.   (Google) 
 
Sayre, Kenneth M. (1969). Consciousness: A Philosophic Study of Minds and Machines. Random House.   (Cited by 9 | Google) 
 
Seager, William E. (2007). A brief history of the philosophical problem of consciousness. In P.D. Zelazo, Morris Moscovitch & Evan Thompson (eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Consciousness. Cambridge University Press.   (Google) 
 
Searle, John R. (2000). Consciousness. Intellectica 31:85-110.   (Cited by 76 | Google | More links) 










 
Searle, John R. (1987). Consciousness and the philosophers. New York Review of Books 44 (4).   (Cited by 23 | Google) 
 
Seager, William E. (1999). Theories of Consciousness: An Introduction and Assessment. Routledge.   (Cited by 46 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Theories of Consciousness provides an introduction to a variety of approaches to consciousness, questions the nature of consciousness, and contributes to current debates about whether a scientific understanding of consciousness is possible. While discussing key figures including Descartes, Fodor, Dennett and Chalmers, the book incorporates identity theories, representational theories, intentionality, externalism and new information-based theories





 
Searle, John R. (1993). The problem of consciousness. Social Research 60 (1):3-16.   (Cited by 29 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: The most important scientific discovery of the present era will come when someone -- or some group -- discovers the answer to the following question: How exactly do neurobiological processes in the brain cause consciousness? This is the most important question facing us in the biological sciences, yet it is frequently evaded, and frequently misunderstood when not evaded. In order to clear the way for an understanding of this problem. I am going to begin to answer four questions: 1. What is consciousness? 2. What is the relation of consciousness to the brain? 3. What are some of the features that an empirical theory of consciousness should try to explain? 4. What are some common mistakes to avoid?








 
Sheets-Johnstone, Maxine (1998). Consciousness: A natural history. Journal of Consciousness Studies 5 (3):260-94.   (Cited by 37 | Google | More links) 




 
Siewert, Charles (2000). Precis of The Significance of Consciousness. Psyche 6 (12).   (Google) 
 
Siewert, Charles (1998). The Significance of Consciousness. Princeton University Press.   (Cited by 159 | Google | More links)
Abstract: "This is a marvelous book, full of subtle, thoughtful, and original argument.





 
Smith, Quentin & Jokic, Aleksandar (eds.) (2003). Consciousness: New Philosophical Perspectives. Oxford University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: Consciousness is perhaps the most puzzling problem we humans face in trying to understand ourselves. Here, eighteen essays offer new angles on the subject. The contributors, who include many of the leading figures in philosophy of mind, discuss such central topics as intentionality, phenomenal content, and the relevance of quantum mechanics to the study of consciousness
 
Stoljar, Daniel (2006). Ignorance and Imagination: The Epistemic Origin of the Problem of Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 9 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Ignorance and Imagination advances a novel way to resolve the central philosophical problem about the mind: how it is that consciousness or experience fits into a larger naturalistic picture of the world. The correct response to the problem, Stoljar argues, is not to posit a realm of experience distinct from the physical, nor to deny the reality of phenomenal experience, nor even to rethink our understanding of consciousness and the language we use to talk about it. Instead, we should view the problem itself as a consequence of our ignorance of the relevant physical facts. Stoljar shows that this change of orientation is well motivated historically, empirically, and philosophically, and that it has none of the side effects it is sometimes thought to have. The result is a philosophical perspective on the mind that has a number of far-reaching consequences: for consciousness studies, for our place in nature, and for the way we think about the relationship between philosophy and science





 
Strawson, Galen (1994). Mental Reality. MIT Press.   (Cited by 121 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Introduction -- A default position -- Experience -- The character of experience -- Understanding-experience -- A note about dispositional mental states -- Purely experiential content -- An account of four seconds of thought -- Questions -- The mental and the nonmental -- The mental and the publicly observable -- The mental and the behavioral -- Neobehaviorism and reductionism -- Naturalism in the philosophy of mind -- Conclusion: The three questions -- Agnostic materialism, part 1 -- Monism -- The linguistic argument -- Materialism and monism -- A comment on reduction -- The impossibility of an objective phenomenology -- Asymmetry and reduction -- Equal-status monism -- Panpsychism -- The inescapability of metaphysics -- Agnostic materialism, part 2 -- Ignorance -- Sensory spaces -- Experience, explanation, and theoretical integration -- The hard part of the mind-body problem -- Neutral monism and agnostic monism -- A comment on eliminativism, instrumentalism, and so on -- Mentalism, idealism, and immaterialism -- Mentalism -- Strict or pure process idealism -- Active-principle idealism -- Stuff idealism -- Immaterialism -- The positions restated -- The dualist options -- Frege's thesis -- Objections to pure process idealism -- The problem of mental dispositions -- Mental -- Shared abilities -- The sorting ability -- The definition of mental being -- Mental phenomena -- The view that all mental phenomena are experiential phenomena -- Natural intentionality -- E/c intentionality -- The experienceless -- Intentionality and abstract and nonexistent objects -- Experience, purely experiential content, and n/c intentionality -- Concepts in nature -- Intentionality and experience -- Summary with problem -- Pain and pain -- The neo-behaviorist view -- A linguistic argument for the necessary connection between pain and behavior -- A challenge -- The Sirians -- N.N. Novel -- An objection to the Sirians -- The Betelgeuzians -- The point of the Sirians -- Functionalism, naturalism, and realism about pain -- Unpleasantness and qualitative character -- The weather watchers -- The rooting story -- What is it like to be a weather watcher? -- The aptitudes of mental states -- The argument from the conditions for possessing the concept of space -- The argument from the conditions for language ability -- The argument from the nature of desire -- Desire and affect -- The argument from the phenomenology of desire -- Behavior -- A hopeless definition -- Difficulties -- Other-observability -- Neo-behaviorism -- The concept of mind.






 
Strong, Charles A. (1912). The nature of consciousness III. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 9 (22):589-603.   (Google | More links) 





 
Strong, Charles A. (1912). The nature of consciousness I. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 9 (20):533-544.   (Google | More links) 





 
Strong, Charles A. (1912). The nature of consciousness II. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 9 (21):561-573.   (Google | More links) 





 
Sturgeon, Scott (2000). Matters of Mind: Consciousness, Reason and Nature. Routledge.   (Cited by 39 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The mind-body problem continues to be the focus of many of our philosophical concerns. Matters of Mind tackles how the problem has spanned and how it has changed from the earlier theories of reducing aboutness to empirical cases for physicalism. The theories of perception, property explanation, content and knowledge, reliabilism and the problem of zombies and ghosts are all carefully assessed







 
Sutherland, Keith (1998). The mirror of consciousness. Journal Of Consciousness Studies 5 (2):235-244.   (Google) 
 
Thompson, Evan (2007). Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sciences of Mind. Harvard University Press.   (Cited by 20 | Google | More links) 




 
Thompson, Evan & Zahavi, Dan (2007). Philosophical theories of consciousness: Continental perspectives. In Philip David Zelazo, Morris Moscovitch & Evan Thompson (eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Consciousness. Cambridge.   (Google) 
 
Tson, M. E. (ms). From Dust to Descartes: A Mechanical and Evolutionary Explanation of Consciousness and Self-Awareness.   (Google)
Abstract: Beginning with physical reactions as simple and mechanical as rust, From Dust to Descartes goes step by evolutionary step to explore how the most remarkable and personal aspects of consciousness have arisen, how our awareness of the world of ourselves differs from that of other species, and whether machines could ever become self-aware. Part I addresses a newborn’s innate abilities. Part II shows how with these and experience, we can form expectations about the world. Parts III concentrates on the essential role that others play in the formation of self-awareness. Part IV then explores what follows from this explanation of human consciousness, touching on topics such as free will, personality, intelligence, and color perception which are often associated with self-awareness and the philosophy of mind. 
 
Tye, Michael (2000). Consciousness, Color, and Content. MIT Press.   (Cited by 213 | Google | More links) 







 
Tye, Michael (2007). Philosophical problems of consciousness. In Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Tye, Michael (1995). Ten Problems of Consciousness: A Representational Theory of the Phenomenal Mind. MIT Press.   (Cited by 538 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Tye's book develops a persuasive and, in many respects, original argument for the view that the qualitative side of our mental life is representational in...






 
van Gulick, Robert (online). Consciousness. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 




 
Velmans, Max (2001). A natural account of phenomenal consciousness. Communication and Cognition 34 (1):39-59.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Physicalists commonly argue that conscious experiences are nothing more than states of the brain, and that conscious qualia are observer-independent, physical properties of the external world. Although this assumes the 'mantle of science,' it routinely ignores the findings of science, for example in sensory physiology, perception, psychophysics, neuropsychology and comparative psychology. Consequently, although physicalism aims to naturalise consciousness, it gives an unnatural account of it. It is possible, however, to develop a natural, nonreductive, reflexive model of how consciousness relates to the brain and the physical world. This paper introduces such a model and how it construes the nature of conscious experience. Within this model the physical world as perceived (the phenomenal world) is viewed as part of conscious experience not apart from it. While in everyday life we treat this phenomenal world as if it is the "physical world", it is really just one biologically useful representation of what the world is like that may differ in many respects from the world described by physics. How the world as perceived relates to the world as described by physics can be investigated by normal science (e.g. through the study of sensory physiology, psychophysics and so on). This model of consciousness appears to be consistent with both third-person evidence of how the brain works and with first-person evidence of what it is like to have a given experience. According to the reflexive model, conscious experiences are really how they seem











 
Velmans, Max & Schneider, Susan (eds.) (2007). The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell Pub..   (Google)
Abstract: With fifty-five peer reviewed chapters written by the leading authors in the field, The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness is the most extensive and comprehensive survey of the study of consciousness available today. Provides a variety of philosophical and scientific perspectives that create a breadth of understanding of the topic Topics include the origins and extent of consciousness, different consciousness experiences, such as meditation and drug-induced states, and the neuroscience of consciousness
 
Villaneuva, E. (ed.) (1991). Consciousness: Philosophical Issues. Ridgeview.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Weisberg, Josh (2007). The Problem of Consciousness: Mental Appearance and Mental Reality. Dissertation, The City University of New York   (Google)
Abstract: of (from Philosophy Dissertations Online)
 
Woodbridge, Frederick J. E. (1936). The problem of consciousness again. Journal of Philosophy 33 (21):561-568.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
1.1b The Concept of Consciousness




Alexander, Hartley Burr (1904). The concept of consciousness. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 1 (5):118-124.   (Google | More links) 




 
Allport, A. (1988). What concept of consciousness? In Anthony J. Marcel & E. Bisiach (eds.), Consciousness in Contemporary Science. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 47 | Google) 
 
Antony, Michael V. (ms). Are our concepts "conscious state" and "conscious creature" vague?   (Cited by 2 | Google)
Abstract: are sharp rather than vague, that they can have no borderline cases. On the other hand, many who take conscious states to be identical to, or realized by, complex physical states are committed to the vagueness of those concepts. In the paper I argue that conscious state and conscious creature are sharp by presenting four necessary conditions for conceiving borderline cases in general, and showing that some of those conditions cannot be met with conscious state. I conclude that conscious state is sharp, and the conclusion is then extended to conscious creature. The paper ends with a brief discussion of some implications
 
Antony, Michael V. (2006). Consciousness and vagueness. Philosophical Studies 128 (3):515-538.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Abstract. An argument is offered for this conditional: If our current concept conscious state is sharp rather than vague, and also correct (at least in respect of its sharpness), then common versions of familiar metaphysical theories of consciousness are false--?namely versions of the identity theory, functionalism, and dualism that appeal to complex physical or functional properties in identification, realization, or correlation. Reasons are also given for taking seriously the claim that our current concept conscious state is sharp. The paper ends by surveying the theoretical options left open by the concept's sharpness and the truth of the conditional argued for in the paper





 
Antony, Michael V. (2002). Concepts of consciousness, kinds of consciousness, meanings of 'consciousness'. Philosophical Studies 109 (1):1-16.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 







 
Antony, Michael V. (2001). Conceiving simple experiences. Journal of Mind and Behavior 22 (3):263-86.   (Cited by 2 | Google)
Abstract: That consciousness is composed of simple or basic elements that combine to form complex experiences is an idea with a long history. This idea is approached through an examination of our
 
Antony, Michael V. (2001). Is 'consciousness' ambiguous? Journal of Consciousness Studies 8 (2):19-44.   (Cited by 13 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Some alleged senses of the term are access consciousness, phenomenal consciousness, state consciousness, creature consciousness, introspective consciousness, self consciousness, to name a few. In the paper I argue for two points. First, there are few if any good reasons for thinking that such alleged senses are genuine:





 
Antony, Michael V. (1999). Outline of a general methodology for consciousness research. Anthropology and Philosophy 3:43-56.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In spite of the enormous interdisciplinary interest in consciousness these days, sorely lacking are general methodologies in terms of which individual research efforts across disciplines can be seen as contributing to a common end





 
Armstrong, David M. (1979). Three types of consciousness. In Brain and Mind. (Ciba Foundation Symposium 69).   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Armstrong, David M. (1981). What is consciousness? In The Nature of Mind. Cornell University Press.   (Cited by 70 | Annotation | Google)




  
Bain, Alexander (1894). Definition and problems of consciousness. Mind 3 (11):348-361.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 






 
Baruss, Imants (1986). Meta-analysis of definitions of consciousness. Imagination, Cognition, and Personality 6:321-29.   (Google) 
 
Becerra, Rodrigo (2004). Homonymous mistakes with ontological aspirations: The persisting problem with the word 'consciousness'. Sorites 15 (December):11-23.   (Google | More links) 





 
Bickhard, Mark H. (2005). Consciousness and reflective consciousness. Philosophical Psychology 18 (2):205-218.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: An interactive process model of the nature of representation intrinsically accounts for multiple emergent properties of consciousness, such as being a contentful experiential flow, from a situated and embodied point of view. A crucial characteristic of this model is that content is an internally related property of interactive process, rather than an externally related property as in all other contemporary models. Externally related content requires an interpreter, yielding the familiar regress of interpreters, along with a host of additional fatal problems. Further properties of consciousness, such as differentiated qualities of experience, including qualia, emerge with conscious reflection. In particular, qualia are not constituents or direct properties of consciousness per se. Assuming that they are so is a common and ultimately disastrous misconstrual of the problems of consciousness










 
Bird, Alexander (online). Concepts and definitions of consciousness.   (Google)
Abstract: in Encyclopedia of Consciousness, ed. William P. Banks, Amsterdam: Elsevier, forthcoming in 2009
 
Bisiach, E. (1988). The (haunted) brain and consciousness. In Anthony J. Marcel & E. Bisiach (eds.), Consciousness in Contemporary Science. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 30 | Annotation | Google)




  
Block, Ned (1997). Author's response. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 20 (1).   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: The distinction between phenomenal (P) and access (A) consciousness arises from the battle between biological and computational approaches to the mind. If P = A, the computationalists are right; but if not, the biological nature of P yields its scientific nature
 
Bode, Boyd H. (1913). The definition of consciousness. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 10 (9):232-239.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Bogen, Joseph E. (1997). An example of access-consciousness without phenomenal consciousness? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 20 (1):144-144.   (Google) 
 
Boodin, John E. (1908). Consciousness and reality: I. Negative definition of consciousness. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 5 (7):169-179.   (Google | More links) 





 
Bradley, Francis H. (1893). Consciousness and experience. Mind 2 (6):211-216.   (Google | More links) 






 
Burr Alexander, Hartley (1904). The concept of consciousness. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 1 (5):118-124.   (Google | More links) 




 
Burt, Cyril (1962). The concept of consciousness. British Journal of Psychology 53:229-42.   (Cited by 9 | Google | More links) 




 
Burge, Tyler (1997). Two kinds of consciousness. In Ned Block, Owen Flanagan & Güven Güzeldere (eds.), The Nature of Consciousness: Philosophical Debates. The Mit Press.   (Google) 
 
Cam, Philip (1985). Phenomenology and speech dispositions. Philosophical Studies 47 (May):357-68.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Caruso, Gregg (2005). Sensory States, Consciousness, and the Cartesian Assumption. In Nathan Smith and Jason Taylor (ed.), Descartes and Cartesianism. Cambridge Scholars Press.   (Google) 
 
Chalmers, David J. (1997). Availability: The cognitive basis of experience? In Ned Block, Owen J. Flanagan & Guven Guzeldere (eds.), The Nature of Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Cited by 26 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: [[This was written as a commentary on Ned Block 's paper "On A Confusion about a Function of Consciousness" . It appeared in _Behavioral_ _and Brain Sciences_ 20:148-9, 1997, and also in the collection _The Nature of Consciousness: Philosophical Debates_ (MIT Press, 1997) edited by Block, Flanagan, and Guzeldere. ]]







 
Church, Jennifer (1998). Two sorts of consciousness? Communication and Cognition 31 (1):51-71.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Clark, Austen (2001). Phenomenal consciousness so-called. In Werner Backhaus (ed.), Neuronal Coding of Perceptual Systems. World Scientific.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: "Consciousness" is a multiply ambiguous word, and if our goal is to explain perceptual consciousness we had better be clear about which of the many senses of the word we are endorsing when we sign on to the project. I describe some of the relatively standard distinctions made in the philosophical literature about different meanings of the word "conscious". Then I consider some of the arguments of David Chalmers and of Ned Block that states of "phenomenal consciousness" pose special and intractable problems for the scientific understanding of perception. I argue that many of these problems are introduced by obscurities in the term itself, and propose a distinction between epistemic and non-epistemic senses of the term "phenomenal consciousness". That distinction helps explain why phenomenal consciousness seems so mysterious to so many people. States of "phenomenal consciousness" are not states of one, elemental (and inexplicable) kind; they are a ragtag lot, of differing levels of complexity, corralled under one heading by a regrettable ambiguity in our terminology





 
Conkling, Mark L. (1977). Ryle's mistake about consciousness. Philosophy Today 21:376-388.   (Google) 
 
Crosson, Frederick J. (1966). The concept of mind and the concept of consciousness. Journal of Existentialism 6:449-458.   (Google) 
 
Davidson, William L. (1881). Definition of consciousness. Mind 6 (23):406-412.   (Google | More links) 





 
De Brigard, Felipe (forthcoming). Attention, Consciousness, and Commonsense. Journal of Consciousness Studies.   (Google)
Abstract: The relation of dependency between consciousness and attention is, once again, a matter 
of heated debate among scientists and philosophers. There are at least three general views on the 
issue. First, there are those who suggest that attention is both necessary and sufficient for 
consciousness (e.g. Posner, 1994; Prinz, 2000, forthcoming). Second, there are those who 
suggest that even though attention is necessary for consciousness, it may not be sufficient (e.g. 
Moran & Desimone, 1984; Rensink et al., 1997; Merikle & Joordens, 1997). Finally, there are 
those who suggest that attention is neither necessary nor sufficient for consciousness, that—at 
most—they are two different processes that happen to be concomitant some of the time, but 
which, under very specific circumstances, can be shown to come apart (e.g. Lamme, 2003; 
Koivisto et al., 2005; Koch & Tsuchiya, 2007). Piles of evidence have been marshaled in favor 
and against each of these alternatives, and as far as I can see, there is no hope of agreement on 
the horizon. 

 
Dennett, Daniel C. (2001). Consciousness: How much is that in real money? In Richard L. Gregory (ed.), Oxford Companion to the Mind. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
de Sousa, Ronald B. (2002). Twelve varieties of subjectivity. In M. Larrazabal & P. Miranda (eds.), Twelve Varieties of Subjectivity: Dividing in Hopes of Conquest. Kluwer.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Dewey, John (1906). The terms 'conscious' and `consciousness'. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 3 (2):39-41.   (Cited by 11 | Google | More links) 






 
Evnine, Simon J. (2008). Kinds and conscious experience: Is there anything that it is like to be something? Metaphilosophy 39 (2):185–202.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In this article I distinguish the notion of there being something it is like to be a certain kind of creature from that of there being something it is like to have a certain kind of experience. Work on consciousness has typically dealt with the latter while employing the language of the former. I propose several ways of analyzing what it is like to be a certain kind of creature and find problems with them all. The upshot is that even if there is something it is like to have certain kinds of experience, it does not follow that there is anything it is like to be a certain kind of creature. Skepticism about the existence of something that it is like to be an F is recommended





 
Faw, Bill (2002). Phenomenal, access, and reflexive consciousness: The missing 'blocks' in Ned Block's typlogy. Consciousness and Emotion 3 (2):145-158.   (Google) 
 
Fingelkurts, Andrew A.; Fingelkurts, Alexander A. & Neves, Carlos F. H. (2010). Natural World Physical, Brain Operational, and Mind Phenomenal Space-Time. Physics of Life Reviews 7 (2):195-249.   (Google)
Abstract: Concepts of space and time are widely developed in physics. However, there is a considerable lack of biologically plausible theoretical frameworks that can demonstrate how space and time dimensions are implemented in the activity of the most complex life-system – the brain with a mind. Brain activity is organized both temporally and spatially, thus representing space-time in the brain. Critical analysis of recent research on the space-time organization of the brain’s activity pointed to the existence of so-called operational space-time in the brain. This space-time is limited to the execution of brain operations of differing complexity. During each such brain operation a particular short-term spatio-temporal pattern of integrated activity of different brain areas emerges within related operational space-time. At the same time, to have a fully functional human brain one needs to have a subjective mental experience. Current research on the subjective mental experience offers detailed analysis of space-time organization of the mind. According to this research, subjective mental experience (subjective virtual world) has definitive spatial and temporal properties similar to many physical phenomena. Based on systematic review of the propositions and tenets of brain and mind space-time descriptions, our aim in this review essay is to explore the relations between the two. To be precise, we would like to discuss the hypothesis that via the brain operational space-time the mind subjective space-time is connected to otherwise distant physical space-time reality.
 
Fite, Warner (1895). The priority of inner experience. Philosophical Review 4 (2):129-142.   (Google | More links) 





 
Gennaro, Rocco J. (1995). Does mentality entail consciousness? Philosophia 24 (3-4):331-58.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 




 
Girle, Roderic A. (1996). Shades of consciousness. Minds and Machines 6 (2):143-57.   (Google | More links) 




 
Goldman, Alvin (1993). Consciousness, folk psychology, and cognitive science. Consciousness and Cognition 2:364-382.   (Cited by 31 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper supports the basic integrity of the folk psychological conception of consciousness and its importance in cognitive theorizing. Section 1 critically examines some proposed definitions of consciousness, and argues that the folk- psychological notion of phenomenal consciousness is not captured by various functional-relational definitions. Section 2 rebuts the arguments of several writers who challenge the very existence of phenomenal consciousness, or the coherence or tenability of the folk-psychological notion of awareness. Section 3 defends a significant role for phenomenal consciousness in the execution of a certain cognitive task, viz., classification of one's own mental states. Execution of this task, which is part of folk psychologizing, is taken as a datum in scientific psychology. It is then argued (on theoretical grounds) that the most promising sort of scientific model of the self-ascription of mental states is one that posits the kinds of phenomenal properties invoked by folk psychology. Cognitive science and neuroscience can of course refine and improve upon the folk understanding of consciousness, awareness, and mental states generally. But the folk-psychological constructs should not be jettisoned; they have a role to play in cognitive theorizing





 
Greidanus, J. H. (1961). Fundamental Physical Theory and the Concept of Consciousness. New York, Pergamon Press.   (Google) 
 
Hamanaka, T. (1997). The concept of consciousness in the history of neuropsychiatry. History of Psychiatry 8:361-373.   (Google | More links) 





 
Harman, Gilbert (online). What is cognitive access?   (Google) 
 
Heinemann, F. H. (1941). The analysis of 'experience'. Philosophical Review 50 (November):561-584.   (Google | More links) 





 
Hellie, Benj (2010). An externalist's guide to inner experience. In Bence Nanay (ed.), Perceiving the World. Oxford University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: Let's be externalists about perceptual consciousness and think the form of veridical perceptual consciousness includes /seeing this or that mind-independent particular and its colors/. Let's also take internalism seriously, granting that spectral inversion and hallucination can be "phenomenally" the same as normal seeing. Then perceptual consciousness and phenomenality are different, and so we need to say how they are related. It's complicated!

Phenomenal sameness is (against all odds) /reflective indiscriminability/. I build a "displaced perception" account of reflection on which indiscriminability stems from shared "qualia". Qualia are compatible with direct realism: while they generate an explanatory gap (and colors do not), so does /seeing/; qualia are excluded from perceptual consciousness by its "transparency"; instead, qualia are aspects of thought about the perceived environment. 

The asymmetry between my treatments of color and seeing is grounded in the asymmetry between ignorance and error: while inversion shows that normal subjects are ignorant of the natures of the colors, hallucination shows not that perceivers are ignorant of the nature of seeing but that hallucinators are prone to error about their condition. Past literature has treated inversion and hallucination as on a par: externalists see error in both cases, while internalists see mutual ignorance. My account is so complicated because plausible results require mixing it up.
 
Helminiak, Daniel A. (1984). Consciousness as a subject matter. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour 14 (July):211-230.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links) 




 
Hellie, Benj (2007). Factive phenomenal characters. Philosophical Perspectives 21 (1):259--306.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper expands on the discussion in the first section of 'Beyond phenomenal naivete'. Let Phenomenal Naivete be understood as the doctrine that some phenomenal characters of veridical experiences are factive properties concerning the external world. Here I present in detail a phenomenological case for Phenomenal Naivete and an argument from hallucination against it. I believe that these arguments show the concept of phenomenal character to be defective, overdetermined by its metaphysical and epistemological commitments together with the world. This does not establish a gappish eliminativism, but a gluttish pluralism, on which there are many imperfect deservers of the name 'phenomenal character'. Different projects in the philosophy of mind -- phenomenology, philosophy of conscious, metaphysics and epistemology of perception -- are concerned with different deservers of the name.





 
Hennig, Boris (2007). Cartesian conscientia. British Journal for the History of Philosophy 15 (3):455-484.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Although Descartes is often said to have coined the modern notion of ‘consciousness’, he defines it neither explicitly nor implicitly. This may imply (1) that he was not the first to use ‘conscientia’ in its modern, psychological sense, or (2) that he still used it in its traditional moral sense. In this paper, I argue for the latter assumption. Descartes used ‘conscientia’ according to the meaning we also find in texts of St. Paul, Augustine, Aquinas and later scholastics. Thus the Cartesian conscientia is, technically speaking, a shared knowledge of the specific value of our thoughts as thoughts and at the same time the cause of this value. This means that it is not itself a kind of individual knowledge, awareness, or a particular thought. Rather, ‘conscientia’ refers to the evaluative knowledge of an ideal observer.








 
Hodgson, Shadworth H. (1894). Reflective consciousness. Mind 3 (10):208-221.   (Google | More links) 







 
Holt, Edwin B. (1914). The Concept of Consciousness. New York,Arno Press.   (Google) 
 
Honderich, Ted (1998). Consciousness as existence. In Anthony O'Hear (ed.), Contemporary Issues in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links) 




 
Honderich, Ted (2004). Consciousness as existence, devout physicalism, spiritualism. Mind and Matter 2 (1):85-104.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Consider three answers to the question of what it actually is for you to be aware of the room you are in. (1) It is for the room in a way to exist. (2) It is for there to be only physical activity in your head, however additionally described. (3) It is for there to be non-spatial facts somehow in your head. The first theory, unlike the other two, satisfies five criteria for an adequate account of consciousness itself. The criteria have to do with the seeming nature of this consciousness, and with subjectivity, reality including non-abstractness, mind-body causation, and the differences between perceptual, reflective and affective consciousness. The theory of consciousness as existence is not open to the objection having to do with a deluded brain in a vat. The theory, as any theory of consciousness needs to, explains its own degree of failure in characterizing consciousness. It releases neuroscience and cognitive science from nervousness about consciousness, and leaves all of consciousness a subject for science. The theory is a reconstruction of our conception of consciousness. It may be that we should carry forward several theories of consciousness. But they will have to be compared in terms of truth to the five criteria for an adequate theory






 
Honderich, Ted (2000). Consciousness as existence again. In Bernard Elevitch (ed.), Theoria. Charlottesville: Philosophy Doc Ctr.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Honderich, Ted (2003). Perceptual, reflective, and affective consciousness as existence. In Anthony O'Hear (ed.), Minds and Persons. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This is a further improved version of a paper previously called `Reflective and Affective Consciousness'. It is better now -- more or less comprehensible if still imperfect. It is the fourth in a series of papers, and continues the idea that consciousness needs to be analysed not in any of the boring ways: by way of the plain or 17th Century materialism that is still with us in new packages, or immaterialism, or dualistic identity theory, or functionalism and cognitive science with philosophical ambition. (For argued surveys of these, and a particular allegiance now abandoned in favour of Consciousness as Existence, go to Mind Brain Connection and Mind and Brain Explanation .) Consciousness needs to be analysed, rather, mainly in terms of things existing outside of heads. The final draft of the paper will eventually turn up in the annual proceedings of The Royal Institute of Philosophy, a volume under the title Minds and Persons edited by Anthony O'Hear. At the end of the paper here there is a summary of it -- in fact the handout for a lecture





 
Huebner, Bryce (2010). Commonsense concepts of phenomenal consciousness: Does anyone care about functional zombies? Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 9 (1).   (Google)
Abstract: It would be a mistake to deny commonsense intuitions a role in developing a theory of consciousness. However, philosophers have traditionally failed to probe commonsense in a way that allows these commonsense intuitions to make a robust contribution to a theory of consciousness. In this paper, I report the results of two experiments on purportedly phenomenal states and I argue that many disputes over the philosophical notion of ‘phenomenal consciousness’ are misguided—they fail to capture the interesting connection between commonsense ascriptions of pain and emotion. With this data in hand, I argue that our capacity to distinguish between ‘mere things’ and ‘subjects of moral concern’ rests, to a significant extent, on the sorts of mental states that we take a system to have
 
Hutto, Daniel D. (2001). Consciousness and Conceptual Schema. In Paavo Pylkkanen & Tere Vaden (eds.), Dimensions of Conscious Experience. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
James, William (1904). Does "consciousness" exist? Journal of Philosophy, Psychology, and Scientific Methods 1 (18):477-491.   (Cited by 171 | Google | More links) 






 
James, William (2005). The notion of consciousness: Communication made (in french) at the 5th international congress of psychology, Rome, 30 April 1905. Journal of Consciousness Studies 12 (7):55-64.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Johnson, A. H. (1964). Ordinary experience. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 25 (September):96-107.   (Google | More links) 





 
Kirk, Robert E. (1992). Consciousness and concepts. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 66 (66):23-40.   (Cited by 7 | Annotation | Google)




  
Knobe, Joshua & Prinz, Jesse J. (2008). Intuitions about consciousness: Experimental studies. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 7 (1):67-83.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: When people are trying to determine whether an entity is capable of having certain kinds of mental states, they can proceed either by thinking about the entity from a *functional* standpoint or by thinking about the entity from a *physical* standpoint. We conducted a series of studies to determine how each of these standpoints impact people’s mental state ascriptions. The results point to a striking asymmetry. It appears that ascriptions of states involving phenomenal consciousness are sensitive to physical factors in a way that ascriptions of other states are not







 
Krikorian, Y. H. (1938). An empirical definition of consciousness. Journal of Philosophy 35 (6):156-161.   (Google | More links) 





 
Kriegel, Uriah (2006). Consciousness: Phenomenal consciousness, access consciousness, and scientific practice. In Paul R. Thagard (ed.), Handbook of the Philosophy of Psychology and Cognitive Science. Elsevier.   (Google)
Abstract: Key Terms: Phenomenal consciousness, access consciousness, qualitative character, subjective character, intransitive self-consciousness, disposition, categorical basis, subliminal perception, blindsight
 
Lagerspetz, Olli (2002). Experience and consciousness in the shadow of Descartes. Philosophical Psychology 15 (1):5-18.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: A conscious being is characterized by its ability to cope with the environment--to perceive it, sometimes change it, and perhaps reflect on it. Surprisingly, most studies of the mind's place in nature show little interest in such interaction. It is often implicitly assumed that the main questions about consciousness just concern the status of various entities, levels, etc., within the individual. The intertwined notions of "(conscious) experience" and "(phenomenal) consciousness" are considered. The predominant use of these notions in cognitive science can be traced back to Cartesianism. What is important is the survival of the central methodological commitments despite seemingly profound changes of metaphysical outlook. The author argues (1) that cognitive scientists typically assimilate perception to sensation, thereby ignoring ways in which descriptions of perception and descriptions of the environment are logically intertwined; (2) that this involves methodological solipsism and an unacknowledged sceptical position that was originally part of Descartes' Dream argument; and (3) that it is impossible to identify the object supposedly to be studied by a science of the phenomenal consciousness. A somewhat parallel argument is identified in Kant's critique of rationalist psychology







 
Laird, John (1923). Mental process and the conscious quality. Mind 32 (127):273-288.   (Google | More links) 






 
Levy, Neil (2008). Does phenomenology overflow access? Journal of Consciousness Studies 15 (7):29-38.   (Google)
Abstract: Ned Block has influentially distinguished two kinds of consciousness, access and phenomenal consciousness. He argues that these two kinds of consciousness can dissociate, and therefore we cannot rely upon subjective report in constructing a science of consciousness. I argue that none of Block's evidence better supports his claim than the rival view, that access and phenomenal consciousness are perfectly correlated. Since Block's view is counterintuitive, and has wildly implausible implications, the fact that there is no evidence that better supports it than the rival view should lead us to reject it
 
Lormand, Eric (1996). Nonphenomenal consciousness. Noûs 30 (2):242-61.   (Cited by 20 | Google | More links)
Abstract: There is not a uniform kind of consciousness common to all conscious mental states: beliefs, emotions, perceptual experiences, pains, moods, verbal thoughts, and so on. Instead, we need a distinction between phenomenal and nonphenomenal consciousness. As if consciousness simpliciter were not mysterious enough, philosophers have recently focused their worries on phenomenal (or qualitative) consciousness, the kind that explains or constitutes there being "something it







 
Lormand, Eric (online). What qualitative consciousness is like.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Lowenthal, Marvin Marx (1915). Comparative study of Spinoza and neo-realism as indicated in Holt's "concept of consciousness". Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 12 (25):673-682.   (Google | More links) 




 
Lycan, William G. (online). The plurality of consciousness.   (Cited by 4 | Google)
Abstract: My topics are consciousness. The plural is deliberate. Both in philosophy and in psychology,
 
Manson, Neil Campbell (2002). Epistemic consciousness. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science A 33 (3):425-441.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 






 
Manson, Neil Campbell (2000). State consciousness and creature consciousness: A real distinction. Philosophical Psychology 13 (3):405-410.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: It is widely held that there is an important distinction between the notion of consciousness as it is applied to creatures and, on the other hand, the notion of consciousness as it applies to mental states. McBride has recently argued in this journal that whilst there may be a grammatical distinction between state consciousness and creature consciousness, there is no parallel ontological distinction. It is argued here that whilst state consciousness and creature consciousness are indeed related, they are distinct properties. Conscious creatures can have, at one time, both conscious and unconscious mental states. This raises the question of what distinguishes the conscious from unconscious mental states of a subject: a question about what state consciousness consists in. Whilst the state/creature distinction may not be of use in explaining every aspect of a subject's consciousness, it does provide a key part of the explanandum for theories of consciousness and mind. The state/creature consciousness distinction is a real one and should not be dropped from our psychological taxonomy







 
Margolis, Joseph (1980). The concept of consciousness. Philosophic Exchange 3:3-18.   (Google) 
 
Markus, Gyorgy (1975). The Marxian concept of consciousness. Philosophy and Social Criticism 3 (1).   (Google) 
 
Matthews, Gareth B. (1977). Consciousness and life. Philosophy 52 (January):13-26.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
McBride, R. (1999). Consciousness and the state/transitive/creature distinction. Philosophical Psychology 12 (2):181-196.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This essay examines the grammatical structure underlying the use of the word "conscious". Despite the existence of this grammatical structure, I reject the assumption that actual consciousness has a similar structure. Specifically, I reject the claim that consciousness consists of three subtypes: state consciousness, transitive consciousness, and creature consciousness. I offer an inductive argument and a deductive argument that no such psychological entities exist. The inductive argument: given the lack of evidence or arguments for the entities and given that a tripartite consciousness structure evolved from a tripartite grammatical habit, it would be far too coincidental if the grammatical distinction mirrored a psychological distinction. The deductive argument (a reductio ad absurdum) shows that absurd conclusions follow from assuming the existence of three distinct psychological entities. Furthermore, the verbal habits that motivate the distinction are rendered more intelligible under a "Unitary Thesis", the idea that verbal distinctions involving use of the word "conscious" are unified in their reliance on a single ontological unit, that of conscious experience








 
Moody, Todd C. (1986). Distinguishing consciousness. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 47 (December):289-95.   (Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1985). An introduction to the perceptual kind of conception of direct (reflective) consciousness. Journal of Mind and Behavior 6:333-356.   (Cited by 8 | Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1983). A selective review of conceptions of consciousness with special reference to behavioristic contributions. Cognition and Brain Theory 6:417-47.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google)




  
Natsoulas, Thomas (1978). Consciousness. American Psychologist 33:906-14.   (Cited by 37 | Annotation | Google)




  
Natsoulas, Thomas (2000). Consciousness and conscience. Journal of Mind and Behavior 21 (4):327-352.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1995). Consciousness(3) and Gibson's concept of awareness. Journal of Mind and Behavior 3 (3):305-28.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1997). Consciousness and self-awareness: Consciousness (1,2,3,4,5,6). Journal of Mind and Behavior 18 (1):53-94.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1983). Concepts of consciousness. Journal of Mind and Behavior 4:195-232.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1993). Consciousness(4): Varieties of intrinsic theory. Journal of Mind and Behavior 14 (2):107-32.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (2001). On the intrinsic nature of states of consciousness: Attempted inroads from the first person perspective. Journal Of Mind And Behavior 22 (3):219-248.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1998). Tertiary consciousness. Journal of Mind and Behavior 19 (2):141-176.   (Cited by 7 | Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1998). The case for intrinsic theory (parts 1-3). Journal of Mind and Behavior 17:267-85.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1991). The concept of consciousness(1): The interpersonal meaning. Journal for the Theory of Social Behavior 21 (September):63-89.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1991). The concept of consciousness(2): The personal meaning. Journal for the Theory of Social Behavior 21 (September):339-67.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1992). The concept of consciousness(3): The awareness meaning. Journal for the Theory of Social Behavior 2 (2):199-25.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1994). The concept of consciousness(4): The reflective meaning. Journal for the Theory of Social Behavior 24 (4):373-400.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1994). The concept of consciousness(5): The unitive meaning. Journal for the Theory of Social Behavior 24 (4):401-24.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1999). The concept of consciousness: The general state meaning. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour 29 (1):59-87.   (Cited by 29 | Google | More links) 








 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1991). The concept of consciousness: The personal meaning. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour (September) 339 (September):339-367.   (Cited by 15 | Google | More links) 





 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1992). The concept of consciousness: The awareness meaning. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour 22 (2):199-225.   (Cited by 9 | Google | More links) 




 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1996). The sciousness hypothesis: Part I. Journal of Mind and Behavior 17 (1):45-66.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Nelkin, Norton (1993). What is consciousness? Philosophy of Science 60 (3):419-34.   (Cited by 11 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 






 
Nelkin, Norton (1987). What is it like to be a person? Mind and Language 2:220-41.   (Cited by 5 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Nguyen, A. Minh (2001). A critique of Dretske's conception of state consciousness. Journal of Philosophical Research 26 (January):187-206.   (Google) 
 
Niedermeyer, E. (1999). A concept of consciousness. Italian Journal of Neurological Sciences 20:7-15.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links) 




 
Nixon, Gregory (2010). Hollows of Experience. Journal of Consciousness Exploration & Research (3):234-288.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This essay is divided into two parts, deeply intermingled. Part I examines not only the
origin of conscious experience but also how it is possible to ask of our own
consciousness how it came to be. Part II examines the origin of experience itself, which
soon reveals itself as the ontological question of Being. The chief premise of Part I
chapter is that symbolic communion and the categorizations of language have enabled
human organisms to distinguish between themselves as actually existing entities and
their own immediate experience of themselves and their world. This enables them to
reflect upon abstract concepts, including “self,” “experience,” and “world.” Symbolic
communication and conceptualization grow out of identification, the act of first
observing conscious experiencing and intimating what it is like, mimesis, a gestural
protolanguage learned through imitation, and reflection, seeing oneself through the eyes
of others. The step into actual intentional speech is made through self-assertion,
narrative, and intersubjectivity. These three become the spiral of human cultural
development that includes not only the adaptive satisfaction of our biological needs, but
also the creativity of thought. With the mental-conceptual separation of subject and
object – of self and world – the human ability to witness the universe (and each other) is
the ground of our genuinely human quality. Consciousness gives human life its
distinctively human reality. It is, therefore, one and the same ability that enables us to
shape planet Earth by means of conceptual representations (rather than by means of our
hands alone) while also awakening us to the significance of being.

Looking beyond human self-consciousness to investigate the origin and nature of
awareness itself in Part 2, reductive objective materialism is found to be of little use.
Direct experience also falls short in that, in order to be transformed into objective
knowledge about itself, it must always be interpreted through and limited by the
symbolic contexts of culture and the idiosyncratic conceptualizations of the individual.
Awareness in itself must thus be considered ultimately unexplainable, but this may
more indicate its inexpressible transcendence of all symbolic qualifiers than its
nonexistence. It is suggested that awareness is not “self-aware” (as in deity) but is
instead unknowing yet identical with the only true universal: the impetus of creative
unfolding. Our human knowledge, as an expression of this unfolding, is seen to emerge
from our conscious experiencing and, in turn, to have the power – and enormous
responsibility – of directing that experience. Our underlying symbolic worldviews are
found to be autopoietic: They limit or open our conscious experience, which, in turn,
confirms those worldview expectations. As we explore a future of unforeseeable
technological breakthroughs on an ailing planet who patiently copes with our “success,”
truly vital decisions about the nature, meaning, and future of conscious experience will
have to be made.





 
O'Shaughnessy, Brian (1998). Experience. In Anthony O'Hear (ed.), Contemporary Issues in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge University Press.   (Google) 
 
O'Shaughnessy, Brian (1991). The anatomy of consciousness. Philosophical Issues 1:135-177.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 






 
Piccinini, Gualtiero (2007). The ontology of creature consciousness: A challenge for philosophy. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 30 (1):103-104.   (Google | More links) 








 
Place, Ullin T. (1992). Two concepts of consciousness: The biological/private and the linguistic/social. Acta Analytica 7 (8):53-72.   (Google) 
 
Prinz, Jesse J. (2007). All consciousness is perceptual. In Brian P. McLaughlin & Jonathan D. Cohen (eds.), Contemporary Debates in Philosophy of Mind. Blackwell.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Rehmke, Johannes (1897). Experience. Philosophical Review 6 (6):608-625.   (Google | More links) 





 
Rehmke, Johannes (1897). Fundamental conceptions regarding the nature of consciousness. Philosophical Review 6 (5):449-470.   (Google | More links) 





 
Ripley, Charles (1984). Sperry's concept of consciousness. Inquiry 27 (December):399-423.   (Cited by 4 | Annotation | Google)




  
Roberts, William H. (1941). Experience - noun or verb? Journal of Philosophy 38 (September):542-548.   (Google | More links) 





 
Rosenthal, David (web). Concepts and definitions of consciousness. In P W. Banks (ed.), Encyclopedia of Consciousness. Elsevier.   (Google)
Abstract: in Encyclopedia of Consciousness, ed. William P. Banks, Amsterdam: Elsevier, forthcoming in 2009
 
Rosenthal, David M. (2001). Consciousness and sensation. In N. J. Smelser & B. Baltes (eds.), International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences.   (Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David (2001). Consciousness and sensation: Philosophical aspects. In N. J. Smelser & P. B. Baltes (eds.), International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences. Pergamon/Elsevier.   (Google)
Abstract: consciousness. Such unconscious processing always 
Cambridge, UK 
tends to re?ect habitual or strong responses. From this 
Rose, Hilary (1999). Changing constructions of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 6 (11-12):251-258.   (Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (2002). How many kinds of consciousness? Consciousness and Cognition 11 (4):653-665.   (Cited by 18 | Google | More links) 







 
Rosenthal, David M. (online). Kinds of consciousness.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (1997). Phenomenal consciousness and what it's like. Behavioral And Brain Sciences 20 (1):64-65.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: be realized. Whatever gets access to phenomenal awareness (to consciousness and P-consciousness are almost always present or P-consciousness as described by Block) is represented within this absent together.






 
Rosenthal, David M. (1994). State consciousness and transitive consciousness. Consciousness and Cognition 2 (3):355-63.   (Cited by 25 | Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (1991). The independence of consciousness and sensory quality. Philosophical Issues 1:15-36.   (Cited by 42 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Ryle, Gilbert (1951). Feelings. Philosophical Quarterly 1 (April):193-205.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 





 
Schlösser, Ulrich (ms). Hegel's conception of philosophical critique. The concept of consciousness and the structure of proof in the introduction to the phenomenology of spirit.   (Google)
Abstract: Among philosophers in the period of change between the late 18th and early 19th centuries it was a widespread conviction that, because the status of a demonstrative theory made up of axioms and proofs was neither available nor desirable for philosophy, philosophical critique would also not be external to the business of philosophy. Rather it was to belong to the essence of philosophy itself. Against this background Hegel occupied himself almost from the beginning of his philosophical thinking with the question of how a critique that is also able to convince an adherent of a theory differing from one’s own should proceed. Initially it must provide him with a description of his standpoint that he himself can accept. Moreover, the critique must tie up with a method of examination that is part of this standpoint itself, because its adherent would not otherwise have to agree to the procedure. Hegel is interested in this matter not only as a description of the hermeneutic situation in which the adherents of two particular, opposing positions find themselves. Rather, he asks himself whether an idea for the procedure of philosophical critique that commits itself to such considerations can also be generalized. This would require giving a minimalist description of the starting point in a way that allows as large a spectrum as possible of positions that are to be the object of the critique to recognize themselves within it. And the procedure of the critique must be able to be developed from this description itself
 
Shanon, Benny (1990). Consciousness. Journal of Mind and Behavior 11 (2):137-51.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google)




  
Shand, Alexander F. (1891). The nature of consciousness. Mind 16 (62):206-222.   (Google | More links) 






 
Singer Jr, Edgar A. (1929). On the conscious mind. Journal of Philosophy 26 (21):561-575.   (Google) 
 
Sloman, Aaron (ms). What is it like to be a rock?   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper aims to replace deep sounding unanswerable, time-wasting pseudo- questions which are often posed in the context of attacking some version of the strong AI thesis, with deep, discovery-driving, real questions about the nature and content of internal states of intelligent agents of various kinds. In particular the question








 
Smith, David Woodruff (2001). Three facets of consciousness. Axiomathes 12 (1-2):55-85.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Over the past century phenomenology has ably analyzed the basic structuresof consciousness as we experience it. Yet recent philosophy of mind, lookingto brain activity and computational function, has found it difficult to makeroom for the structures of subjectivity and intentionality that phenomenologyhas appraised. In order to understand consciousness as something that is bothsubjective and grounded in neural activity, we need to delve into phenomenologyand ontology. I draw a fundamental distinction in ontology among the form,appearance, and substrate of any entity. Applying this three-facet ontology toconsciousness, we distinguish: the intentionality of consciousness (its form),the way we experience consciousness (its appearance, including so-called qualia),and the physical, biological, and cultural basis of consciousness (its substrate).We can thus show how these very different aspects of consciousness fit togetherin a fundamental ontology. And we can thereby define the proper domains ofphenomenology and other disciplinesthat contribute to our understanding of consciousness







 
Sperry, Roger W. (1969). A modified concept of consciousness. Psychological Review 76:532-36.   (Cited by 80 | Annotation | Google)




  
Sytsma, Justin (2010). Folk psychology and phenomenal consciousness. Philosophy Compass 5 (8):700-711.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In studying folk psychology, cognitive and developmental psychologists have mainly focused on how people conceive of non-experiential states, such as beliefs and desires. As a result, we know very little about how the non-philosophers (or the folk) understand the mental states that philosophers typically classify as being phenomenally conscious. In particular, it is not known whether the folk even tend to classify mental states in terms of their being or not being phenomenally conscious in the first place. Things have changed dramatically in the last few years, however, with a flurry of ground-breaking research by psychologists and experimental philosophers. In this article, I will review this work, carefully distinguishing between two questions: First, are the ascriptions that the folk make with regard to the mental states that philosophers classify as phenomenally conscious related to their decisions about whether morally right or wrong action has been done to an entity? Second, do the folk tend to classify mental states in the way that philosophers do, distinguishing between mental states that are phenomenally conscious and mental states that are not phenomenally conscious?





 
Sytsma, Justin & Machery, Edouard (2009). How to study folk intuitions about phenomenal consciousness. Philosophical Psychology 22 (1):21 – 35.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The assumption that the concept of phenomenal consciousness is pretheoretical is often found in the philosophical debates on consciousness. Unfortunately, this assumption has not received the kind of empirical attention that it deserves. We suspect that this is in part due to difficulties that arise in attempting to test folk intuitions about consciousness. In this article we elucidate and defend a key methodological principle for this work. We draw this principle out by considering recent experimental work on the topic by Joshua Knobe and Jesse Prinz (2008). We charge that their studies do not establish that the folk have a concept of phenomenal consciousness in part because they compare group agents to individuals . The problem is that group agents and individuals differ in some significant ways in terms of functional organization and behavior. We propose that future experiments should establish that ordinary people are disposed to ascribe different mental states to entities that are given behaviorally and functionally equivalent descriptions





 
Sytsma, Justin & Machery, Edouard (forthcoming). Two conceptions of subjective experience. Philosophical Studies.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Do philosophers and ordinary people conceive of subjective experience in the same way? In this article, we argue that they do not and that the philosophical concept of phenomenal consciousness does not coincide with the folk conception. We first offer experimental support for the hypothesis that philosophers and ordinary people conceive of subjective experience in markedly different ways. We then explore experimentally the folk conception, proposing that for the folk, subjective experience is closely linked to valence. We conclude by considering the implications of our findings for a central issue in the philosophy of mind, the hard problem of consciousness





 
Thomas, Nigel J. T. (1998). Imagination, eliminativism, and the pre-history of consciousness. Consciousness Research Abstracts 3.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Classical and medieval writers had no term for consciousness in anything like the modern sense, and their philosophy seems not to have been troubled by the mind-body problem. Contemporary eliminativists find strong support in this fact for their claim that consciousness does not exist, or, at least, is not an appropriate scientific explanandum. They typically hold that contemporary conceptions of consciousness are artefacts of Descartes' (now outmoded) views about matter and his unrealistic craving for epistemological certainty. Essentially, they say, our belief in consciousness is a residue of once pressing, but now irrelevant, intellectual tensions between religion and the rising new science of the Early Modern period. With the attempts of Descartes and his successors to resolve these tensions, Western thought began down a track toward the conceptual cul-de-sac of the "hard problem". Plausibly, the problem will only be (dis)solved, and the onward march of science assured, when we are able to shake off the pervasive influence of the Cartesian tradition in a way that goes far beyond the mere rejection of dualism. But when we do so, eliminativists contend, the distinctively Cartesian notion of consciousness will simply drop out of our world-picture, like phlogiston or the vital entelechy






 
Tye, Michael (1995). The burning house. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Imprint Academic & Paderborn.   (Cited by 8 | Annotation | Google)




  
Vaneechoutte, Mario (2000). Experience, awareness, and consciousness: Suggestions for definitions as offered by an evolutionary approach. Foundations of Science 5 (4):429-456.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: An evolutionary point of view is proposed to make more appropriate distinctions between experience, awareness and consciousness. Experience can be defined as a characteristic linked closely to specific pattern matching, a characteristic already apparent at the molecular level at least. Awareness can be regarded as the special experience of one or more central, final modules in the animal neuronal brain. Awareness is what experience is to animals.Finally, consciousness could be defined as reflexive awareness. The ability for reflexive awareness is distinctly different from animal and human awareness and depends upon the availability of a separate frame of reference, as provided by symbolic language. As such, words have made reflexive awareness








 
van der Waals, E. G. (1949). The psycho-analytical and the phenomenological concept of consciousness. International Journal of Psychoanalysis 30.   (Google) 
 
Velmans, Max, Defining consciousness.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The following extracts with connecting comments suggest a departure point for a definitions of consciousness that preserves its everyday phenomenology while allowing an understanding of what consciousness is to deepen as scientific investigation proceeds. I argue that current definitions are often theory-driven rather than following the contours of ordinary experience. Consequently they are sometimes too broad, sometimes too narrow, and sometimes not definitions of phenomenal consciousness at all. As an alternative, an ecologically valid, reflexive approach to consciousness is suggested that is consistent with science and with common sense







 
Velmans, Prof Max (2009). How to define consciousness—and how not to define consciousness. Cogprints.   (Google)
Abstract: Definitions of consciousness need to be sufficiently broad to include all examples of conscious states and sufficiently narrow to exclude entities, events and processes that are not conscious. Unfortunately, deviations from these simple principles are common in modern consciousness studies, with consequent confusion and internal division in the field. The present paper gives example of ways in which definitions of consciousness can be either too broad or too narrow. It also discusses some of the main ways in which pre-existing theoretical commitments (about the nature of consciousness, mind and world) have intruded into definitions. Similar problems can arise in the way a “conscious process” is defined, potentially obscuring the way that conscious phenomenology actually relates to its neural correlates and antecedent causes in the brain, body and external world. Once a definition of “consciousness” is firmly grounded in its phenomenology, investigations of its ontology and its relationships to entities, events and processes that are not conscious can begin, and this may in time transmute the meaning (or sense) of the term. As our scientific understanding of these relationships deepen, our understanding of what consciousness is will also deepen. A similar transmutation of meaning (with growth of knowledge) occurs with basic terms in physics such as "energy", and "time."
 
Woodbridge, Frederick J. E. (1905). The nature of consciousness. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 2 (5):119-125.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 





 
Zemach, Eddy M. (1973). The nature of consciousness. Dialectica 27:43-65.   (Google | More links) 




 
1.1c Philosophy of Consciousness, Misc




Becker, Joe (2008). Conceptualizing Mind and Consciousness: Using Constructivist Ideas to Transcend the Physical Bind. Human Development 51 (3):165-189.   (Google)
Abstract: Philosophers and scientists seeking to conceptualize consciousness, and subjective experience in particular, have focused on sensation and perception, and have emphasized binding – how a percept holds together. Building on a constructivist approach to conception centered on separistic-holistic complexes incorporating multiple levels of abstraction, the present approach reconceptualizes binding and opens a new path to theorizing the emergence of consciousness. It is proposed that all subjective experience involves multiple levels of abstraction, a central feature of conception. This modifies the prevalent idea of sequential development from sensation through perception to conception. Further, this approach to mind and consciousness links constructivist theory to artistic activity and suggests that conception, subjective experience, aboutness (intentionality), and agency are linked together through separistic-holistic complexes. It also argues for change in the prevailing constructivist view that regards the process of production of new levels of conception as inherently directed towards better fit with the external environment. Copyright © 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel
 
Burton, Robert G. (2005). A multilevel, interdisciplinary approach to phenomenal consciousness. Southern Journal of Philosophy 43 (4):531-543.   (Google) 
 
Byrne, Alex; Hilbert, David & Siegel, Susanna (online). Do we see more than we can access?   (Google) 
 
Carruthers, Peter (2001). Who is blind to blindsight? Psyche 7 (4).   (Google) 
 
Chalmers, David J. (unknown). On ``consciousness and the philosophers''. .   (Google)
Abstract: John Searle's review of my book The Conscious Mind appeared in the March 6, 1997 edition of the New York Review of Books. I replied in a letter printed in their May 15, 1997 edition, and Searle's response appeared simultaneously. I set up this web page so that interested people can see my reply to Searle in turn, and to give access to other relevant materials
 
Chalmers, David J. (unknown). Reply to mulhauser's review of the conscious mind. .   (Google)
Abstract: First, I should clarify the notion of "taking consciousness seriously", which serves as a premise in my work. Mulhauser characterizes this as the assumption that no cognitive theory of consciousness will suffice. The latter assumption would indeed beg some crucial questions, but it is not the assumption that I make. I make an assumption about the problem of consciousness, not about any solution. To quote (p. xii): Throughout the book, I have assumed that consciousness exists, and that to redefine the problem as that of explaining how certain cognitive and behavioral functions are performed is unacceptable. This is what I mean by taking consciousness seriously. That is, the premise is simply that there is a phenomenon to be explained, and that the problems of explaining such functions as discrimination, integration, self monitoring, reportability, and so on do not exhaust all the problems in the vicinity. The deepest problem of consciousness, as I understand it, is not the problem of how all these functions are performed, but rather the problem of explaining how and why all this activity supports states of subjective experience
 
Chalmers, David J. (1997). Response to Searle. New York Review of Books 44 (8).   (Google)
Abstract: In my book _The Conscious Mind_ , I deny a number of claims that John Searle finds "obvious", and I make some claims that he finds "absurd". But if the mind/body problem has taught us anything, it is that nothing about consciousness is obvious, and that one person's obvious truth is another person's absurdity. So instead of throwing around this sort of language, it is best to examine the claims themselves and the arguments that I give for them, to see whether Searle says anything of substance that touches them
 
Clark, Andy (2000). Phenomenal immediacy and the doors of sensation. Journal of Consciousness Studies 7 (4):21-24.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Cody, Arthur B. (1994). Hannay's consciousness. Inquiry 37 (1):117-132.   (Google) 
 
Corkum, Phil (2005). Aristotle on consciousness. Newsletters for the Society for Ancient Greek Philosophy 5 (1):80-93.   (Google) 
 
Dennett, Daniel C. (2005). Two steps closer on consciousness. In Brian L. Keeley (ed.), Paul Churchland. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: For a solid quarter century Paul Churchland and I have been wheeling around in the space of work on consciousness, and though from up close it may appear that we =ve been rather vehemently opposed to each other =s position, from the bird =s eye view, we are moving in a rather tight spiral within the universe of contested views, both staunch materialists, interested in the same phenomena and the same empirical theories of those phenomena, but differing only over where the main chance lies for progress
 
Dretske, Fred (2001). First person warrant: Comments on Siewert's The Significance of Consciousness. Psyche 7 (11).   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Dreyfus, George & Thompson, Evan (2007). Philosophical theories of consciousness: Asian perspectives. In Philip David Zelazo, Morris Moscovitch & Evan Thompson (eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Consciousness. Cambridge.   (Google) 
 
Gale, Richard M. (online). William James on the misery and glory of consciousness.   (Google) 
 
Gertler, Brie (2001). The relationship between phenomenality and intentionality: Comments on Siewert's The Significance of Consciousness. Psyche 7 (17).   (Google)
Abstract: Charles Siewert offers a persuasive argument to show that the presence of certain phenomenal features logically suffices for the presence of certain intentional ones. He claims that this shows that (some) phenomenal features are inherently intentional. I argue that he has not established the latter thesis, even if we grant the logical sufficiency claim. For he has not ruled out a rival alternative interpretation of the relevant data, namely, that (some) intentional features are inherently phenomenal
 
Graham, George & Horgan, Terence E. (1998). Sensations and grain processes. In Gregory R. Mulhauser (ed.), Evolving Consciousness. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Hannay, Alastair (1994). Comments on Honderich, Sprigge, Dreyfus and Rubin, and Elster. Synthese 98 (1):95-112.   (Google | More links) 




 
Harr,  (2000). Social construction and consciousness. In Max Velmans (ed.), Investigating Phenomenal Consciousness: New Methodologies and Maps. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins Publishing Company..   (Google) 
 
Hurley, Susan L. (online). Is there a substantive disagreement here? Reply to Chemero and Cordeiro.   (Google) 
 
Hurley, Susan L. (online). The space of reasons vs. the space of inference: Reply to Noe.   (Google) 
 
Kirk, Robert E. (2002). Thinking about Papineau's Thinking About Consciousness. SWIF Philosophy of Mind [December 2.   (Google | More links) 




 
Levin, Janet (1997). Consciousness disputed (review of Chalmers, Dretske, and tye). British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 48 (1):91-107.   (Google) 
 
Levine, Joseph (2001). Phenomenal consciousness and the first-person. Psyche 7 (10).   (Google) 
 
Lähteenmäki, Vili (2007). Orders of Consciousness and Forms of Reflexivity in Descartes. In Sara Heinämaa, Vili Lähteenmäki & Pauliina Remes (eds.), Consciousness: From Perception to Reflection in the History of Philosophy. Springer.   (Google) 
 
Lähteenmäki, Vili (2008). The Sphere of Experience in Locke: The Relations Between Reflection, Consciousness, and Ideas. Locke Studies 8 (1):59-100.   (Google) 
 
Livingston, Paul M. (2002). Experience and structure: Philosophical history and the problem of consciousness. Journal Of Consciousness Studies 9 (3):15-33.   (Google | More links) 




 
Ludwig, Kirk A. (2002). Phenomenal consciousness and intentionality: Comments on The Significance of Consciousness. Psyche 8 (8).   (Cited by 2 | Google)
Abstract: _The Significance of Consciousness_ . Princeton: Princeton University Press. $42.50 hbk. x + 374pp. ISBN: 0691027242.  ABSTRACT: I discuss three issues about the relation of phenomenal consciousness, in the sense Siewert isolates, to
 
Lurz, Robert W. (2001). Taking the first-person approach: Two worries for Siewert's sense of 'consciousness'. Psyche 7 (14).   (Google) 
 
Lycan, William G. (2001). Have we neglected phenomenal consciousness? Psyche 7 (3).   (Cited by 6 | Google)
Abstract: Charles Siewert's _The Significance of Consciousness_ contends that most philosophers and psychologists who have written about "consciousness" have neglected a crucial type or aspect that Siewert calls "phenomenal consciousness" and tries carefully to define. The present article argues that some philosophers, at least, have not neglected phenomenal consciousness and have offered tenable theories of it
 
Melnuk, Andrew (2002). Papineau on the intuition of distinctness. SWIF Philosophy of Mind 10.   (Google) 
 
Nagel, Thomas (1993). The mind wins. New York Review of Books, March 4.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (2000). On the intrinsic nature of states of consciousness: Further considerations in the light of James's conception. Consciousness and Emotion 1 (1):139-166.   (Google)
Abstract: How are the states of consciousness intrinsically so that they all qualify as ?feelings? in William James?s generic sense? Only a small, propaedeutic part of what is required to address the intrinsic nature of such states can be accomplished here. I restrict my topic mainly to a certain characteristic that belongs to each of those pulses of mentality that successively make up James?s stream of consciousness. Certain statements of James?s are intended to pick out the variable ?width? belonging to a stream of consciousness as it flows. Attention to this proposed property brings me to a discussion of (a) the unitary character of each of the states of consciousness however complex they may frequently be and (b) how to conceive of their complexity without recourse to a misleading spatial metaphor
 
Nelkin, Dana K. (2001). Phenomenal consciousness and intentionality. Psyche 7 (13).   (Google)
Abstract: Siewert identifies a special kind of conscious experience, phenomenal consciousness, that is the sort of consciousness missing in a variety of cases of blindsight. He then argues that phenomenal consciousness has been neglected by students of consciousness when it should not be. According to Siewert, the neglect is based at least in part on two false assumptions: (i) phenomenal features are not intentional and (ii) phenomenal character is restricted to sensory experience. By identifying an essential tension in Siewert's characterization of phenomenal consciousness, I argue that his case for denying (i) and (ii) is at best incomplete
 
Noe, Alva (ms). Perception, action, and nonconceptual content.   (Google)
Abstract: profile deforms as we move about it. As perceivers we are masters of the patterns of sensorimotor contingency that shape our perceptual interaction with the world. We expect changes in such things as apparent size, shape and color to occur as we actively explore the environment. In encountering perspective-dependent changes of this sort, we learn how things are quite apart form our particular perspective. Our possession of these skills is constitutive of our ability to see (and generally to perceive). This is confirmed by the fact that we can disrupt a person
 
Papineau, David (2003). Reply to Kirk and Melnyk. SWIF Philosophy of Mind 9.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: I am lucky to have two such penetrating commentators as Robert Kirk and Andrew Melnyk. It is also fortunate that they come at me from different directions, and so cover different aspects of my book. Robert Kirk has doubts about the overall structure of my enterprise, and in particular about my central commitment to a distinctive species of phenomenal concepts. Andrew Melnyk, by contrast, offers no objections to my general brand of materialism. Instead he focuses specifically on my discussion of the anti-materialist 'intuition of distinctness', raising questions about my attempt to explain this intuition away, and offering alternative suggestions of his own





 
Piccinini, Gualtiero (2007). The Ontology of Creature Consciousness: A Challenge for Philosophy. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 30 (1):103-104.   (Google)
Abstract: I appeal to Merker's theory to motivate a hypothesis about the ontology of consciousness: Creature consciousness is (at least partially) constitutive of phenomenal consciousness. Rather than elaborating theories of phenomenal consciousness couched solely in terms of state consciousness, as philosophers are fond of doing, a correct approach to phenomenal consciousness should begin with an account of creature consciousness.
 
Robbins, Philip (2008). Consciousness and the social mind. Cognitive Systems Research 9 (1-2):15-23.   (Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David (web). Phenomenological overflow and cognitive access. Behavioral and Brain Sciences.   (Google) 
 
Seager, William E. (2001). Consciousness, value and functionalism. Psyche 7 (20).   (Google) 
 
Siewert, Charles (2004). Replies. Psyche.   (Google) 
 
Smith, A. D. (2001). O'Shaughnessy's consciousness. Philosophical Quarterly 51 (205):532-539.   (Google | More links) 





 
Sundstrom, Par (2006). Review of Papineau's Thinking About Consciousness. Theoria 76 (1).   (Google) 
 
Sundström, Pär (2005). Wittgenstein, consciousness, and the mind. Sorites 16 (December):6-22.   (Google | More links) 







 
Sytsma, Justin (2009). Phenomenological obviousness and the new science of consciousness. Philosophy of Science 76 (5).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Is phenomenal consciousness a problem for the brain sciences? An increasing number of researchers hold not only that it is but that its very existence is a deep mystery. That this problematic phenomenon exists is generally taken for granted: It is asserted that phenomenal consciousness is just phenomenologically obvious. In contrast, I hold that there is no such phenomenon and, thus, that it does not pose a problem for the brain sciences. For this denial to be plausible, however, I need to show that phenomenal consciousness is not phenomenologically obvious. That is the goal of this article. †To contact the author, please write to: 1414 Simona Drive, Pittsburgh, PA 15201; e‐mail: jmsytsma@gmail.com






 
Thomas, Alan (1997). Kant, McDowell and the theory of consciousness. European Journal of Philosophy 5 (3):283-305.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper examines some of the central arguments of John McDowell's Mind and World, particularly his treatment of the Kantian themes of the spontaneity of thought and of the nature of self-consciousness. It is argued that in so far as McDowell departs from Kant, his position becomes less plausible in three respects. First, the space of reason is identified with the space of responsible and critical freedom in a way that runs together issues about synthesis below the level of concepts and at the level of complete judgements. This leads to the unwarranted exclusion of animal minds from the space of reasons. Second, McDowell draws no essential distinction between apperception and inner sense, a distinction which is important to a defensible Kantian view and to the very idea of a sui generis transcendental knowledge of the mind that is consistent with Kant's critical principles. McDowell does not take into account some of Kant's developed arguments about the inherently reflective nature of consciousness which is interpreted as an adverbial theory of the nature of conscious experience, a mode of being in a mental state (so neither an intrinsic nor extrinsic property of it). Third, McDowell endorses a standard treatment of Kant's approach to the mind in which a merely formal account of mind needs to be anchored outside consciousness on the physical body. The arguments for this conclusion, both in Mind and World and in related work by Bermudez and Hurley, is shown to be very inconclusive as a criticism of Kant. The capacity to self-ascribe thoughts that are already conscious shows, but does not say, a truth about the unity of our conscious experience that does not require further anchoring on a physical body; at that stage of the Critique Kant is describing conditions for conscious experience in general, not the conscious experience of spatio-temporally located makers of judgements. The alleged lacuna in Kant's arguments is no lacuna at all








 
Thomas, Nigel (ms). The study of imagination as an approach to consciousness.   (Google)
Abstract: The concept of consciousness appears to have had little currency before the 17th century. Not only did philosophers before Descartes fail to worry about how consciousness fitted into the natural world, they did not even claim to be conscious. If we are conscious, however, we must assume that they were too, and it hardly seems plausible that they could have been unaware of it. In fact, when the mind was discussed in former ages, both before and within the work of Descartes, the concept of imagination filled most (not all) of the key conceptual roles that consciousness fills today. Although it was not considered uniquely problematic, in the way that consciousness is, imagination continued to be used in these ways long after the Cartesian revolution. It was both the mental arena where thinking took place - where ideas (images) had their being and their interaction - and, implicitly, the power whereby the deliverances of the material sense organs were integrated and rendered meaningful (and, thereby, rendered 'mental'). This suggests that the study of the imagination (in the relevant senses) ought to have a considerable bearing on the study of consciousness, and it may even provide a way to outflank the notorious 'hard problem' that seems to stand in the way of a direct scientific assault on consciousness itself
 
Tranchina, Michael, Freedom and Spirituality.   (Google)
Abstract: This essay explores the phenomenon of spirituality by delineating of the rise of free will as a product of a reflective consciousness synthesized from conditioned responses resulting from external demands.
 
Uzgalis, William (2008). Review of Barry Dainton, The Phenomenal Self. Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews 2008 (12).   (Google) 
 
Velmans, Prof Max (2009). Psychophysical nature. In Cogprints.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: There are two quite distinct ways in which events that we normally think of as “physical” relate in an intimate way to events that we normally think of as “psychological”. One intimate relation occurs in exteroception at the point where events in the world become events as-perceived. The other intimate relationship occurs at the interface of conscious experience with its neural correlates in the brain. The chapter examines each of these relationships and positions them within a dual-aspect, reflexive model of how consciousness relates to the brain and external world. The chapter goes on to provide grounds for viewing mind and nature as fundamentally psychophysical, and examines similar views as well as differences in previously unpublished writings of Wolfgang Pauli, one of the founders of quantum mechanics





 
Vosgerau, Gottfried (2009). Mental Representation and Self-Consciousness: From Basic Self-Representation to Self-Related Cognition. Dissertation, Ruhr-Universität Bochum   (Google)
Abstract: One oft the most fascinating abilities of humans is the ability to become conscious of the own physical and mental states. In this systematic investigation of self-consciousness, a representational theory is developed that is able to distinguish between different levels of self-consciousness. The most basic levels are already present in such simple animals as ants. From these basic forms, which are also relevant for adult human self-consciousness, high-level self-consciousness including self-knowledge can arise. Thereby, the theory is not only able to integrate developmental considerations but also to sharply distinguish different aspects of the complex phenomenon self-consciousness. Pathological breakdowns of these different aspects, as they can be found in schizophrenia, are explained by specific impairments on different levels of self-representation. In this way, the work shows that a naturalistic theory of self-consciousness is possible, if the analysis starts with very simple and basic mechanisms instead of starting on the »top of the iceberg«.
 
Witmer, D. Gene (2001). Experience, appearance, and hidden features. Psyche 7 (9).   (Google) 
 
1.2 Explaining Consciousness?




Fodor, Jerrold A. (1991). Too hard for our kind of mind? London Review of Books 13 (12):12.   (Google) 
 
Thomas, Nigel J. T. (2009). Visual Imagery and Consciousness. In William P. Banks (ed.), Encyclopedia of Consciousness.   (Google)
Abstract: Defining Imagery: Experience or Representation?
Historical Development of Ideas about Imagery
Subjective Individual Differences in Imagery Experience
Theories of Imagery, and their Implications for Consciousness
 Picture theory
 Description theory
 Enactive theory
 
Velmans, Max (2009). Understanding Consciousness Edition 2. Routledge/Psychology Press.   (Google)
Abstract: A current, comprehensive summary of Velmans' theoretical work that updates and deepens the analysis given in Edition 1. Part 1 reviews the strengths and weaknesses of all currently dominant theories of consciousness in a form suitable for undergraduates, postgraduates and researchers focusing mainly on dualism, physicalism, functionalism and consciousness in machines. Part 2 gives a new analysis of consciousness, grounded in its everyday phenomenology, which undermines the basis of the dualism versus reductionist debate. It also examines the consequences for realism versus idealism, subjectivity, intersubjectivity and objectivity, and the relation of consciousness to brain processing. Part 3 gives a new synthesis, with a novel approach to understanding what consciousness is and what consciousness does. It also introduces Reflexive Monism, an alternative to dualism and reductionism that is consistent with the findings of science and with common sense.
 
1.2a What is it Like?




Akins, Kathleen (1993). A bat without qualities? In Martin Davies & Glyn W. Humphreys (eds.), Consciousness: Psychological and Philosophical Essays. Blackwell.   (Cited by 24 | Annotation | Google)




  
Akins, Kathleen (1993). What is it like to be Boring and myopic? In B. Dahlbom (ed.), Dennett and His Critics. Blackwell.   (Cited by 22 | Annotation | Google)




  
Alter, Torin (2002). Nagel on imagination and physicalism. Journal of Philosophical Research 27:143-58.   (Cited by 2 | Google)
Abstract: In "What is it Like to be a Bat?" Thomas Nagel argues that we cannot imagine what it is like to be a bat or presently understand how physicalism might be true. Both arguments have been seriously misunderstood. I defend them against various objections, point out a problem with the argument against physicalism, and show how the problem can be solved
 
Beisecker, David (2005). Phenomenal consciousness, sense impressions, and the logic of 'what it's like'. In Ralph D. (Ed) Ellis & Natika (Ed). Newton (eds.), Consciousness & Emotion: Agency, Conscious Choice, and Selective Perception. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Blackmore, Susan J. (2003). What is it like to be...? In Susan J. Blackmore (ed.), Consciousness: An Introduction. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
BonJour, Laurence A. (ms). What is it like to be human (instead of a bat).   (Google)
Abstract: My purpose in this paper is to discuss and defend an objection to physicalist or materialist accounts of the mind
 
Evnine, Simon J. (2008). Kinds and conscious experience: Is there anything that it is like to be something? Metaphilosophy 39 (2):185–202.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In this article I distinguish the notion of there being something it is like to be a certain kind of creature from that of there being something it is like to have a certain kind of experience. Work on consciousness has typically dealt with the latter while employing the language of the former. I propose several ways of analyzing what it is like to be a certain kind of creature and find problems with them all. The upshot is that even if there is something it is like to have certain kinds of experience, it does not follow that there is anything it is like to be a certain kind of creature. Skepticism about the existence of something that it is like to be an F is recommended





 
Flanagan, Owen J. (1985). Consciousness, naturalism and Nagel. Journal of Mind and Behavior 6:373-90.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google)




  
Foss, Jeffrey E. (1989). On the logic of what it is like to be a conscious subject. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 67 (June):305-320.   (Cited by 5 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 







 
Hacker, P. M. S. (2002). Is there anything it is like to be a bat? Philosophy 77 (300):157-174.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The concept of consciousness has been the source of much philosophical, cognitive scientific and neuroscientific discussion for the past two decades. Many scientists, as well as philosophers, argue that at the moment we are almost completely in the dark about the nature of consciousness. Stuart Sutherland, in a much quoted remark, wrote that







 
Hanna, Patricia (1992). If you can't talk about it, you can't talk about it: A response to H.o. Mounce. Philosophical Investigations 15 (2):185-190.   (Google) 
 
Hanna, Patricia (1990). Must thinking bats be conscious? Philosophical Investigations 13 (October):350-55.   (Google) 
 
Harmon, Justin L. (2009). What Is It Like to Be Mysterious, Alienated, and Wildly Rich through Less Than Savory Means? Phenomenal Consciousness and Aesthetic Experience. Consciousness, Literature, and the Arts 10 (2).   (Google) 
 
Hellie, Benj (2004). Inexpressible truths and the allure of the knowledge argument. In Yujin Nagasawa, Peter Ludlow & Daniel Stoljar (eds.), There's Something About Mary. The Mit Press.   (Google)
Abstract: I argue on linguistic grounds that when Mary comes to know what it's like to see a red thing, she comes to know a certain inexpressible truth about the character of her own experience. This affords a "no concept" reply to the knowledge argument. The reason the Knowledge Argument has proven so intractable may be that we believe that an inexpressible concept and an expressible concept cannot have the same referent.
 
Hellie, Benj (2007). 'There's something it's like' and the structure of consciousness. Philosophical Review 116 (3):441--63.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: I discuss the meaning of 'There's something e is like', in the context of a reply to Eric Lormand's 'The explanatory stopgap'. I argue that Lormand is wrong to think it has a specially perceptual meaning. Rather, it has one of at least four candidate meanings: (a) e is some way as regards its subject; (b) e is some way and e's being that way is in the possession of its subject; (c) e is some way in the awareness of its subject; (d) e's subject is the "experiencer" of e. I provide additional argumentation for the view in this paper that in the context, 'like this' functions as a predicate variable.





 
Hill, Christopher S. (1977). Of bats, brains, and minds. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 38 (September):100-106.   (Google | More links) 





 
Kulvicki, John (2007). What is what it's like? Introducing perceptual modes of presentation. Synthese 156 (2).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The central claim of this paper is that what it is like to see green or any other perceptible property is just the perceptual mode of presentation of that property. Perceptual modes of presentation are important because they help resolve a tension in current work on consciousness. Philosophers are pulled by three mutually inconsistent theses: representational externalism, representationalism, and phenomenal internalism. I throw my hat in with defenders of the first two: the externalist representationalists. We are faced with the problem of explaining away intuitions that favor phenomenal internalism. Perceptual modes of presentation account for what it is like to see properties in a way that accommodates those intuitions without vindicating phenomenal internalism itself. Perceptual MoPs therefore provide a new way of being an externalist representationalist






 
Lewis, David (1983). Postscript to "mad pain and Martian pain". Philosophical Papers 12:122-133.   (Cited by 23 | Annotation | Google)




  
Lormand, Eric (2004). The explanatory stopgap. Philosophical Review 113 (3):303-57.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Is there an explanatory gap between raw feels and raw material? Some philosophers argue, and many other people believe, that scientific explanations of conscious experience cannot be as satisfying as typical scientific explanations elsewhere, even in our wildest dreams. The underlying philosophical claims are









 
Macpherson, Fiona (2006). Ambiguous figures and the content of experience. Noûs 40 (1):82-117.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Representationalism is the position that the phenomenal character of an experience is either identical with, or supervenes on, the content of that experience. Many representationalists hold that the relevant content of experience is nonconceptual. I propose a counter-example to this form of representationalism that arises from the phenomenon of Gestalt switching, which occurs when viewing ambiguous figures. First, I argue that one does not need to appeal to the conceptual content of experience or to judge- ments to account for Gestalt switching. I then argue that experiences of certain ambiguous figures are problematic because they have different phenomenal characters but that no difference in the nonconceptual content of these experiences can be identified. I consider three solutions to this problem that have been proposed by both philosophers and psychologists and conclude that none can account for all the ambiguous figures that pose the problem. I conclude that the onus is on representationalists to specify the relevant difference in content or to abandon their position







 
Macpherson, Fiona (2000). Representational Theories of Phenomenal Character. Dissertation, University of Stirling   (Google | More links) 




 
Maloney, J. Christopher (1986). About being a bat. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 64 (March):26-49.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 








 
Malatesti, Luca (2004). Knowing what it is like and knowing how. In Alberto Peruzzi (ed.), Mind and Causality. John Benjamins.   (Google) 
 
McCulloch, Gregory (1988). What it is like. Philosophical Quarterly 38 (January):1-19.   (Cited by 5 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
McMullen, C. (1985). 'Knowing what it's like' and the essential indexical. Philosophical Studies 48 (September):211-33.   (Cited by 12 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Medina, Jeffrey A. (2002). What it's like and why: Subjective qualia explained as objective phenomena. [Journal (on-Line/Unpaginated)] 12:12.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Notably spurred into the philosophical forefront by Thomas Nagel's 'What Is It Like To Be a Bat?' decades ago, and since maintained by a number of advocates of dualism since that critical publication, is the assertion that our inability to know 'what it's like' to be someone or something else is inexplicable given physicalism. Contrary to this well-known and central objection, I find that a consistent and exhaustive physicalism is readily conceivable. I develop one such theory and demonstrate that not only is it consistent with the private and varied nature of subjective experience, it, in fact, entails it






 
Mellor, D. H. (1993). Nothing like experience. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 63:1-16.   (Cited by 14 | Annotation | Google)




  
Nagasawa, Yujin (2003). Thomas versus Thomas: A new approach to Nagel's bat argument. Inquiry 46 (3):377-395.   (Google | More links) 









 
Nagel, Thomas (1974). What is it like to be a bat? Philosophical Review 83 (October):435-50.   (Cited by 1354 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 
















 
Nelkin, Norton (1987). What is it like to be a person? Mind and Language 2:220-41.   (Cited by 5 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Nemirow, Laurence (1990). Physicalism and the cognitive role of acquaintance. In William G. Lycan (ed.), Mind and Cognition. Blackwell.   (Cited by 55 | Annotation | Google)




  
Nemirow, Laurence (1980). Review of Nagel's mortal questions. Philosophical Review 89:473-7.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google)




  
Pugmire, David R. (1989). Bat or Batman. Philosophy 64 (April):207-17.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Rowlatt, Penelope (2009). Consciousness and Memory. Journal of Consciousness Studies 16 (5):68-78.   (Google)
Abstract: Defining consciousness along the lines of Nagel, an organism has consciousness iff there is something it is like to be that organism, I relate three types of consciousness (phenomenal, access and reflexive) to the three types of short-term memory (sensory memories, short-term working memory and the central executive). The suggestion is that these short-term memory stores may be a key feature of consciousness.
 
Rudd, Anthony J. (1999). What it's like and what's really wrong with physicalism: A Wittgensteinian perspective. Journal of Consciousness Studies 5 (4):454-63.   (Google) 
 
Russow, L. (1982). It's not like that to be a bat. Behaviorism 10:55-63.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google)




  
Simoni-Wastila, Henry (2000). Particularity and consciousness: Wittgenstein and Nagel on privacy, beetles and bats. Philosophy Today 44 (4):415-425.   (Google) 
 
Spencer, Cara (ms). Indexical Knowledge and Phenomenal Knowledge.   (Google)
Abstract: A familiar story about phenomenal knowledge likens it to indexical knowledge, i.e. knowledge about oneself typically expressed with sentences containing indexicals or demonstratives. The popularity of this sort of story owes in part to its promise of resolving some longstanding puzzles about phenomenal knowledge. One such puzzle arises from the compelling arguments that we can have full objective knowledge of the world while lacking some phenomenal knowledge. I argue that the widespread optimism about the indexical account on this score is unwarranted.
 
Teller, Paul R. (1992). Subjectivity and knowing what it's like. In Ansgar Beckermann, Hans Flohr & Jaegwon Kim (eds.), Emergence or Reduction?: Prospects for Nonreductive Physicalism. De Gruyter.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Tilghman, B. R. (1991). What is it like to be an aardvark? Philosophy 66 (July):325-38.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google)




  
Wider, Kathleen (1989). Overtones of solipsism in Nagel's 'what is it like to be a bat?' And 'the view from nowhere'. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 49:481-99.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Wright, Edmond L. (1996). What it isn't like. American Philosophical Quarterly 33 (1):23-42.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
1.2b Subjectivity and Objectivity




Biro, John I. (2006). A point of view on points of view. Philosophical Psychology 19 (1):3-12.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: A number of writers have deployed the notion of a point of view as a key to the allegedly theory-resistant subjective aspect of experience. I examine that notion more closely than is usually done and find that it cannot support the anti-objectivist's case. Experience may indeed have an irreducibly subjective aspect, but the notion of a point of view cannot be used to show that it does







 
Biro, John I. (1993). Consciousness and objectivity. In Martin Davies & Glyn W. Humphreys (eds.), Consciousness: Psychological and Philosophical Essays. Blackwell.   (Cited by 11 | Google | More links) 




 
Biro, John I. (1991). Consciousness and subjectivity. Philosophical Issues 1:113-133.   (Cited by 12 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Chrisley, Ronald L. (2001). A view from anywhere: Prospects for an objective understanding of consciousness. In Paavo Pylkkanen & Tere Vaden (eds.), Dimensions of Conscious Experience. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Christofidou, Andrea (1999). Subjectivity and the first person: Some reflections. Philosophical Inquiry 21 (3-4):1-27.   (Google) 
 
Decker, Kevin S. (2008). The evolution of the psychical element: George Herbert Mead at the university of chicago: Lecture notes by H. Heath Bawden 1899–1900: Introduction. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society 44 (3):pp. 469-479.   (Google)
Abstract: George Herbert Mead's early lectures at the University of Chicago are more important to understanding the genesis of his views in social psychology than some commentators, such as Hans Joas, have emphasized. Mead's lecture series "The Evolution of the Psychical Element," preserved through the notes of student H. Heath Bawden, demonstrate his devotion to Hegelianism as a method of thinking and how this influenced his non-reductionistic approach to functional psychology. In addition, Mead's breadth of historical knowledge as well as his commitments in the natural and social sciences are on display here, culminating in the Darwinian observation that human animals only achieve the degree of control they have over their environment by the achievement of social organization
 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1988). Review of Fodor, psychosemantics. [Journal (Paginated)] 85:384-389.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In Word and Object, Quine acknowledged the "practical indispensability" in daily life of the intentional idioms of belief and desire but disparaged such talk as an "essentially dramatic idiom" rather than something from which real science could be made in any straightforward way.Endnote 1 Many who agree on little else have agreed with Quine about this, and have gone on to suggest one or another indirect way for science to accommodate folk psychology: Sellars, Davidson, Putnam, Rorty, Stich, the Churchlands, Schiffer and myself, to name a few. This fainthearted consensus is all wrong, according to Fodor, whose new book is a vigorous--even frantic--defense of what he calls Intentional Realism: beliefs and desires are real, causally involved, determinately contentful states. "We have no reason to doubt," Fodor says, "that it is possible to have a scientific psychology that vindicates commonsense belief/desire explanation." (p.16)










 
Eilan, Naomi M. (1997). Objectivity and the perspective of consciousness. European Journal of Philosophy 5 (3):235-250.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 






 
Foss, Jeffrey E. (1993). Subjectivity, objectivity, and Nagel on consciousness. Dialogue 32 (4):725-36.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google)




  
Francescotti, Robert M. (1993). Subjective experience and points of view. Journal of Philosophical Research 18:25-36.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Gunderson, Keith (1970). Asymmetries and mind-body perplexities. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science 4:273-309.   (Cited by 34 | Annotation | Google)




  
Haksar, V. (1981). Nagel on subjective and objective. Inquiry 24 (March):105-21.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google)




  
Harre, Rom (1999). Nagel's challenge and the mind-body problem. Philosophy 74 (288):247-270.   (Google | More links) 




 
Harmon, Justin L. (2009). What Is It Like to Be Mysterious, Alienated, and Wildly Rich through Less Than Savory Means? Phenomenal Consciousness and Aesthetic Experience. Consciousness, Literature, and the Arts 10 (2).   (Google) 
 
Hiley, David R. (1978). Materialism and the inner life. Southern Journal of Philosophy 16:61-70.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Johnston, Mark (2007). Objective mind and the objectivity of our minds. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 75 (2):233–268.   (Google | More links) 





 
Jones, Philip C. (1949). Subjectivity in philosophy. Philosophy of Science 16 (January):49-57.   (Google | More links) 






 
Kekes, John (1977). Physicalism and subjectivity. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 37 (June):533-6.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Lycan, William G. (1987). Subjectivity. In Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Lycan, William G. (1990). What is the "subjectivity" of the mental? Philosophical Perspectives 11 (2):229-238.   (Cited by 34 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Malcolm, Norman (1988). Subjectivity. Philosophy 63 (April):147-60.   (Cited by 5 | Annotation | Google)




  
Mandik, Pete (2000). Chapter 1: Subjective and Objective Judgments. Dissertation, Washington University   (Google)
Abstract: Many philosophical issues concern questions of objectivity and subjectivity. Of these questions, there are two kinds. The first considers whether something is objective or subjective; the second what it _means_ for something to be objective or subjective
 
Mandik, Pete (2001). Mental representation and the subjectivity of consciousness. Philosophical Psychology 14 (2):179-202.   (Cited by 11 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Many have urged that the biggest obstacles to a physicalistic understanding of consciousness are the problems raised in connection with the subjectivity of consciousness. These problems are most acutely expressed in consideration of the knowledge argument against physicalism. I develop a novel account of the subjectivity of consciousness by explicating the ways in which mental representations may be perspectival. Crucial features of my account involve analogies between the representations involved in sensory experience and the ways in which pictorial representations exhibit perspectives or points of view. I argue that the resultant account of subjectivity provides a basis for the strongest response physicalists can give to the knowledge argument












 
Mandik, Pete (2008). The Neural Accomplishment of Objectivity. In Pierre Poirier & Luc Faucher (eds.), Des Neurones a La Philosophie: Neurophilosophie Et Philosophie Des Neurosciences. Éditions Syllepse.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Philosophical tradition contains two major lines of thought concerning the relative difficulty of the notions of objectivity and subjectivity. One tradition, which we might characterize as





 
Mandik, Pete (2009). The neurophilosophy of subjectivity. In John Bickle (ed.), Oxford Handbook of Philosophy and Neuroscience. Oxford University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: The so-called subjectivity of conscious experience is central to much recent work in the philosophy of mind. Subjectivity is the alleged property of consciousness whereby one can know what it is like to have certain conscious states only if one has undergone such states oneself. I review neurophilosophical work on consciousness and concepts pertinent to this claim and argue that subjectivity eliminativism is at least as well supported, if not more supported, than subjectivity reductionism
 
McClamrock, Ron (1992). Irreducibility and subjectivity. Philosophical Studies 67 (2):177-92.   (Cited by 4 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: ...the problem of...how cognition...is possible at all...can never be answered on the basis of a prior knowledge of the transcendent [i.e. the external, spatio-temporal, empirical]...no matter whence the knowledge or the judgments are borrowed, not even if they are taken from the exact sciences.... It will not do to draw conclusions from existences of which one knows but which one cannot "see". "Seeing" does not lend itself to demonstration or deduction. [Husserl 1964a, pp. 2-3]






 
Metzinger, Thomas (1994). Subjectivity and mental representation. In Analyomen. Hawthorne: De Gruyter.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Metzinger, Thomas (2004). The subjectivity of subjective experience: A representationalist analysis of the first-person perspective. Networks.   (Cited by 39 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Before one can even begin to model consciousness and what exactly it means that it is a subjective phenomenon one needs a theory about what a first-person perspective really is. This theory has to be conceptually convincing, empirically plausible and, most of all, open to new developments. The chosen conceptual framework must be able to accommodate scientific progress. Its ba- sic assumptions have to be plastic as it were, so that new details and empirical data can continuously be fed into the theoretical model as it grows and becomes more refined. This paper makes an attempt at sketching the outlines of such a theory, offering a representationalist analysis of the phenomenal first-person perspective. Three phenomenal target properties are centrally relevant:


















 
Mounce, H. O. (1992). On Nagel and consciousness. Philosophical Investigations 15 (2):178-84.   (Google) 
 
Muscari, Paul G. (1992). Subjective experience. Philosophical Inquiry 14 (3-4).   (Google) 
 
Muscari, Paul G. (1985). The subjective character of experience. Journal of Mind and Behavior 6:577-97.   (Google) 
 
Muscari, Paul G. (1987). The status of humans in Nagel's phenomenology. Philosophical Forum 19:23-33.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Nagel, Thomas (1994). Consciousness and objective reality. In Richard Warner & Tadeusz Szubka (eds.), The Mind-Body Problem: A Guide to the Current Debate. Blackwell.   (Cited by 9 | Google) 
 
Nagel, Thomas (1979). Subjective and objective. In Mortal Questions. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 20 | Annotation | Google)




  
Nagel, Thomas (1986). The View From Nowhere. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 1108 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: Human beings have the unique ability to view the world in a detached way: We can think about the world in terms that transcend our own experience or interest, and consider the world from a vantage point that is, in Nagel's words, "nowhere in particular". At the same time, each of us is a particular person in a particular place, each with his own "personal" view of the world, a view that we can recognize as just one aspect of the whole. How do we reconcile these two standpoints--intellectually, morally, and practically? To what extent are they irreconcilable and to what extent can they be integrated? Thomas Nagel's ambitious and lively book tackles this fundamental issue, arguing that our divided nature is the root of a whole range of philosophical problems, touching, as it does, every aspect of human life. He deals with its manifestations in such fields of philosophy as: the mind-body problem, personal identity, knowledge and skepticism, thought and reality, free will, ethics, the relation between moral and other values, the meaning of life, and death. Excessive objectification has been a malady of recent analytic philosophy, claims Nagel, it has led to implausible forms of reductionism in the philosophy of mind and elsewhere. The solution is not to inhibit the objectifying impulse, but to insist that it learn to live alongside the internal perspectives that cannot be either discarded or objectified. Reconciliation between the two standpoints, in the end, is not always possible



















 
Pasztor, Ana (1998). Subjective experience divided and conquered. Communication and Cognition 31 (1):73-102.   (Cited by 8 | Google | More links) 






 
Peacocke, Christopher (2009). Objectivity. Mind 118 (471).   (Google)
Abstract: Some of our most important mental states and events have a minimal objectivity, in this intuitive sense: a thinker’s being in the state, or enjoying the event, does not in general make the content of the state or event correct. In general, making a judgement is one thing, the correctness of what is judged is another. Having a perceptual experience as of something’s being the case does not in general make it the case. Valuing things that have a certain property does not in general make possession of that property something of value. What explains this minimal objectivity? How is it possible?
 
Prinz, Wolfgang (2003). Emerging selves: Representational foundations of subjectivity. Consciousness and Cognition 12 (4):515-528.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: A hypothetical evolutionary scenario is offered meant to account for the emergence of mental selves. According to the scenario, mental selves are constructed to solve a source-attribution problem. They emerge when internally generated mental contents (e.g., thoughts and goals) are treated like messages arising from external personal sources. As a result, mental contents becomes attributed to the self as an internal personal source. According to this view, subjectivity is construed outward-in, that is, one's own mental self is derived from, and is secondary to, the mental selves perceived in others. The social construction of subjectivity and selfhood relies on, and is maintained in, various discourses on subjectivity








 
Ratcliffe, Matthew (2002). Husserl and Nagel on subjectivity and the limits of physical objectivity. Continental Philosophy Review 35 (4):353-377.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Thomas Nagel argues that the subjective character of mind inevitably eludes philosophical efforts to incorporate the mental into a single, complete, physically objective view of the world. Nagel sees contemporary philosophy as caught on the horns of a dilemma







 
Rorty, Richard (1993). Holism, intrinsicality, and the ambition of transcendence. In B. Dahlbom (ed.), Dennett and His Critics. Blackwell.   (Cited by 12 | Annotation | Google)




  
Rosen, Steven M. (2004). Dimensions of Apeiron: A Topological Phenomenology of Space, Time, and Individuation. Editions Rodopi, Value Inquiry Book Series.   (Google)
Abstract: This book explores the evolution of space and time from the apeiron—the spaceless, timeless chaos of primordial nature. Steven M. Rosen examines Western culture’s past efforts to deny the apeiron, and the present possibility that lifting the repression of apeiron might serve to advance the process of human individuation. In proposing a radical rethinking of science’s underlying notions of space and time, Rosen employs phenomenological philosophy (primarily Merleau-Ponty and Heidegger), supplemented by an original application of the qualitative field of mathematics known as topology.
 
Rosen, Robert (1993). Drawing the boundary between subject and object: Comments on the mind-brain problem. Theoretical Medicine 14 (2):89-100.   (Cited by 10 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Physics says that it cannot deal with the mind-brain problem, because it does not deal in subjectivities, and mind is subjective. However, biologists (among others) still claim to seek a material basis for subjective mental processes, which would thereby render them objective. Something is clearly wrong here. I claim that what is wrong is the adoption of too narrow a view of what constitutes objectivity, especially in identifying it with what a machine can do. I approach the problem in the light of two cognate circumstances: (a) the measurement problem in quantum physics, and (b) the objectivity of standard mathematics, even though most of it is beyond the reach of machines. I argue that the only resolution to such problems is in the recognition that closed loops of causation are objective; i.e. legitimate objects of scientific scrutiny. These are explicitly forbidden in any machine or mechanism. A material system which contains such loops is called complex. Such complex systems thus must possess nonsimulable models; i.e. models which contain impredicativities or self-references which cannot be removed, or faithfully mapped into a single coherent syntactic time-frame. I consider a few of the consequences of the above, in the context of thus redrawing the boundary between subject and object







 
Rosen, Steven M. (2000). Focusing on the Flesh: Merleau-Ponty, Gendlin, and Lived Subjectivity. Lifwynn Correspondence 5 (1):1-14.   (Google) 
 
Rosen, Steven M. (1986). On Whiteheadian Dualism: A Reply to Professor Griffin. Journal of Religion and Psychical Research 9 (1):11-17.   (Google)
Abstract: In this article, the author defends his claim that a subtle form of metaphysical dualism can be found in Alfred North Whitehead's central notion of the "actual occasion." Rosen contends that phenomenological philosophers such as Martin Heidegger go further than Whitehead in challenging traditional dualism.
 
Rosen, Steven M. (2008). Quantum Gravity and Phenomenological Philosophy. Foundations of Physics 38 (6):556-582.   (Google)
Abstract: The central thesis of this paper is that contemporary theoretical physics is grounded in philosophical presuppositions that make it difficult to effectively address the problems of subject-object interaction and discontinuity inherent to quantum gravity. The core objectivist assumption implicit in relativity theory and quantum mechanics is uncovered and we see that, in string theory, this assumption leads into contradiction. To address this challenge, a new philosophical foundation is proposed based on the phenomenology of Maurice Merleau-Ponty and Martin Heidegger. Then, through the application of qualitative topology and hypernumbers, phenomenological ideas about space, time, and dimension are brought into focus so as to provide specific solutions to the problems of force-field generation and unification. The phenomenological string theory that results speaks to the inconclusiveness of conventional string theory and resolves its core contradiction.
 
Rosen, Steven M. (1994). Science, Paradox, and the Moebius Principle: The Evolution of a "Transcultural" Approach to Wholeness. State University of New York Press; Series in Science, Technology, and Society.   (Google)
Abstract: This book confronts basic anomalies in the foundations of contemporary knowledge. Rosen deals with paradoxes that call into question conventional ways of thinking about space and time, and the nature of human experience. In the course of bringing together theoretical science and phenomenological thought, the author offers a process theory in which space, time, and consciousness undergo continuous internal transformation and organic growth. The work is “transcultural” in the sense of bridging the “two cultures” of science and the humanities.
 
Rosen, Steven M. (2006). Topologies of the Flesh: A Multidimensional Exploration of the Lifeworld. Ohio University Press, Series in Continental Thought.   (Google)
Abstract: The concept of “flesh” in philosophical terms derives from the writings of Maurice Merleau-Ponty. This was the word he used to name the concrete realm of sentient bodies and life processes that has been eclipsed by the abstractions of science, technology, and modern culture. Topology, to conventional understanding, is the branch of mathematics that concerns itself with the properties of geometric figures that stay the same when the figures are stretched or deformed. "Topologies of the Flesh" is a blend of continental thought and mathematical imagination that proposes a new area of philosophical inquiry: topological phenomenology. Through the application of qualitative mathematics, the work extends the approaches of Merleau-Ponty and Heidegger so as to offer a detailed exploration of previously uncharted dimensions of human experience and the natural world. 
 
Rosen, Steven M. (2008). The Self-Evolving Cosmos: A Phenomenological Approach to Nature's Unity-in-Diversity. World Scientific Publishing, Series on Knots and Everything.   (Google)
Abstract: This book offers an original way of thinking about two of the most significant problems confronting modern theoretical physics: the unification of the forces of nature and the evolution of the universe. In bringing out the inadequacies of the prevailing approach to these questions, the author demonstrates the need for more than just a new theory. The meanings of space and time themselves must be radically rethought, which requires a whole new philosophical foundation. To this end, the book turns to the phenomenological writings of Martin Heidegger and Maurice Merleau-Ponty. Their insights into space and time bring the natural world to life in a manner well-suited to the dynamic phenomena of contemporary physics.
 
Rosen, Steven M. (1997). Wholeness as the Body of Paradox. The Journal of Mind and Behavior 18 (4):391-423.   (Google)
Abstract: This essay is written at the crossroads of intuitive holism, as typified in Eastern thought, and the discursive reflectiveness more characteristic of the West. The point of departure is the age-old human need to overcome fragmentation and realize wholeness. Three basic tasks are set forth: to provide some new insight into the underlying obstacle to wholeness, to show what would be necessary for surmounting this blockage, and to take a concrete step in that direction. At the outset, the question of paradox is addressed, examined in relation to Zen meditation, the problem of language, and the thinking of Heidegger. Wholeness is to be realized through paradox, and it is shown that a complete realization requires that paradox be embodied. Drawing from the fields of visual geometry and qualitative mathematics, three concrete models of paradox are offered: the Necker cube, the Moebius surface, and the Klein bottle. In attempting to model wholeness, an important limitation is recognized: a model is a symbolic representation that maintains the division between the reality represented and the act of symbolizing that reality. It is demonstrated that while the first two models are subject to this limitation, the Klein bottle, possessing higher dimensionality, can express wholeness more completely, provided that it is approached in a radically nonclassical way. The final question of this essay concerns its own capability as an essay. It is asked whether the present text is restricted to affording a mere abstract reflection on wholeness, or whether wholeness can tangibly be delivered.
 
Baker, Lynne Rudder (1998). The first-person perspective: A test for naturalism. American Philosophical Quarterly 35 (4):327-348.   (Cited by 24 | Google)
Abstract: Self-consciousness, many philosophers agree, is essential to being a person. There is not so much agreement, however, about how to understand what self- consciousness is. Philosophers in the field of cognitive science tend to write off self- consciousness as unproblematic. According to such philosophers, the real difficulty for the cognitive scientist is phenomenal consciousness--the fact that we (and other organisms) have states that feel a certain way. If we had a grip on phenomenal consciousness, they think, self-consciousness could be easily handled by functionalist models. For example, recently Ned Block commented,
 
Spencer, Cara (ms). Indexical Knowledge and Phenomenal Knowledge.   (Google)
Abstract: A familiar story about phenomenal knowledge likens it to indexical knowledge, i.e. knowledge about oneself typically expressed with sentences containing indexicals or demonstratives. The popularity of this sort of story owes in part to its promise of resolving some longstanding puzzles about phenomenal knowledge. One such puzzle arises from the compelling arguments that we can have full objective knowledge of the world while lacking some phenomenal knowledge. I argue that the widespread optimism about the indexical account on this score is unwarranted.
 
Sprigge, Timothy L. S. (1982). The importance of subjectivity: An inaugural lecture. Inquiry 25 (June):143-63.   (Cited by 4 | Annotation | Google)




  
Sturgeon, Scott (1994). The epistemic basis of subjectivity. Journal of Philosophy 91 (5):221-35.   (Cited by 37 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Sundström, Pär (2002). Nagel's case against physicalism. Sats 3 (2):91-108.   (Google | More links) 




 
Sundstrom, Par (1999). Psychological Phenomena and First-Person Perspectives: Critical Discussions of Some Arguments in Philosophy of Mind. Acta University Umensis.   (Google) 
 
Sytsma, Justin, Experiments on the folk theory of consciousness.   (Google)
Abstract: It is not uncommon to find assumptions being made about folk psychology in the discussions of phenomenal consciousness in philosophy of mind. In this article I consider one example, focusing on what Dan Dennett says about the “folk theory of consciousness.” I show that he holds that the folk believe that the sensory qualities that we are acquainted with in ordinary perception are phenomenal qualities. Nonetheless, the shape of the folk theory is an empirical matter and in the absence of empirical investigation there is ample room for doubt. Fortunately, experimental evidence on the topic is now being produced by experimental philosophers and psychologists. This article contributes to this growing literature, presenting the results of six new studies on the folk view of colors and pains. I argue that the results indicate against Dennett’s theory of the folk theory of consciousness
 
Taliaferro, Charles (1988). Nagel's vista or taking subjectivity seriously. Southern Journal of Philosophy 26:393-401.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Taliaferro, Charles (1997). The perils of subjectivity. Inquiry 40 (4):475-480.   (Google | More links) 





 
van Gulick, Robert (1985). Physicalism and the subjectivity of the mental. Philosophical Topics 13 (3):51-70.   (Cited by 12 | Annotation | Google)




  
Xu, Xiangdong (2004). Consciousness, subjectivity and physicalism. Philosophical Inquiry 26 (1-2):21-39.   (Google) 
 
1.2c The Explanatory Gap




Balog, Katalin (forthcoming). In Defense of the Phenomenal Concept Strategy. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research.   (Google)
Abstract: During the last two decades, several different anti-physicalist arguments based on an epistemic or conceptual gap between the phenomenal and the physical have been proposed. The most promising physicalist line of defense in the face of these arguments – the Phenomenal Concept Strategy – is based on the idea that these epistemic and conceptual gaps can be explained by appeal to the nature of phenomenal concepts rather than the nature of non-physical phenomenal properties. Phenomenal concepts, on this proposal, involve unique cognitive mechanisms, but none that could not be fully physically implemented. David Chalmers has recently presented a Master Argument to show that the Phenomenal Concept Strategy – not just this or that version of it, but any version of it – fails. Chalmers argues that the phenomenal concepts posited by such theories are either not physicalistically explicable, or they cannot explain our epistemic situation with regard to qualia. I argue that it is his Master Argument that fails. My claim is his argument does not provide any new reasons to reject the Phenomenal Concept Strategy. I also argue that, although the Phenomenal Concept Strategy is successful in showing that the physicalist is not rationally compelled to give up physicalism in the light of the anti-physicalist arguments, the anti-physicalist is not rationally compelled to give up the anti-physicalist argument in the light of the Phenomenal Concept Strategy either.
 
Beckermann, Ansgar (2000). The perennial problem of the reductive explainability of phenomenal consciousness: C. D. broad on the explanatory gap. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Neural Correlates of Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links)
Abstract: At the start of the 20th century the question of whether life could be explained in purely me- chanical terms was as hotly debated as the mind-body problem is today. Two factions opposed each other: Biological mechanists claimed that the properties characteristic of living organisms (metabolism, perception, goal-directed behavior, procreation, morphogenesis) could be ex- plained mechanistically, in the way the behavior of a clock can be explained by the properties and the arrangement of its cogs, springs, and weights. Substantial vitalists, on the other hand, maintained that the explanation envisaged by the mechanists was impossible and that one had to postulate a special nonphysical substance in order to explain life







 
Benbaji, Hagit (2008). Constitution and the explanatory gap. Synthese 161 (2).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Proponents of the explanatory gap claim that consciousness is a mystery. No one has ever given an account of how a physical thing could be identical to a phenomenal one. We fully understand the identity between water and H2O but the identity between pain and the firing of C-fibers is inconceivable. Mark Johnston [Journal of philosophy (1997), 564–583] suggests that if water is constituted by H2O, not identical to it, then the explanatory gap becomes a pseudo-problem. This is because all “manifest kinds”—those identified in experience—are on a par in not being identical to their physical bases, so that the special problem of the inconceivability of ‘pain = the firing of C-fibers’ vanishes. Moreover, the substitute relation, constitution, raises no explanatory difficulties: pain can be constituted by its physical base, as can water. The thesis of this paper is that the EG does not disappear when we substitute constitution for identity. I examine four arguments for the EG, and show that none of them is undermined by the move from constitution to identity





 
Bengtsson, David (2003). The nature of explanation in a theory of consciousness. Lund University Cognitive Studies 106.   (Google) 
 
Bieri, Peter (1995). Why is consciousness puzzling? In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Ferdinand Schoningh.   (Cited by 10 | Annotation | Google)




  
Block, Ned & Stalnaker, Robert (1999). Conceptual analysis, dualism, and the explanatory gap. Philosophical Review 108 (1):1-46.   (Cited by 119 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The explanatory gap . Consciousness is a mystery. No one has ever given an account, even a highly speculative, hypothetical, and incomplete account of how a physical thing could have phenomenal states. (Nagel, 1974, Levine, 1983) Suppose that consciousness is identical to a property of the brain, say activity in the pyramidal cells of layer 5 of the cortex involving reverberatory circuits from cortical layer 6 to the thalamus and back to layers 4 and 6,as Crick and Koch have suggested for visual consciousness. (See Crick (1994).) Still, that identity itself calls out for explanation! Proponents of an explanatory gap disagree about whether the gap is permanent. Some (e.g. Nagel, 1974) say that we are like the scientifically naive person who is told that matter = energy, but does not have the concepts required to make sense of the idea. If we can acquire these concepts, the gap is closable. Others say the gap is uncloseable because of our cognitive limitations. (McGinn, 1991) Still others say that the gap is a consequence of the fundamental nature of consciousness







 
Byrne, Alex (online). Tye on color and the explanatory gap.   (Google)
Abstract: It will not have escaped notice that the defendant in this afternoon
 
Campbell, Neil (2009). Why we should lower our expectations about the explanatory gap. Theoria 75 (1):34-51.   (Google)
Abstract: I argue that the explanatory gap is generated by factors consistent with the view that qualia are physical properties. I begin by considering the most plausible current approach to this issue based on recent work by Valerie Hardcastle and Clyde Hardin. Although their account of the source of the explanatory gap and our potential to close it is attractive, I argue that it is too speculative and philosophically problematic. I then argue that the explanatory gap should not concern physicalists because it makes excessive demands on physical theory
 
Carruthers, Peter & Schechter, Elizabeth (2006). Can panpsychism bridge the explanatory gap? Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11):32-39.   (Google | More links) 




 
Carruthers, Peter (2004). Reductive explanation and the "explanatory gap". Canadian Journal of Philosophy 34 (2):153-174.   (Cited by 10 | Google)
Abstract: Can phenomenal consciousness be given a reductive natural explanation? Exponents of an
 
Chalmers, David J. (2006). Phenomenal concepts and the explanatory gap. In Torin Alter & Sven Walter (eds.), Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 13 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Confronted with the apparent explanatory gap between physical processes and consciousness, there are many possible reactions. Some deny that any explanatory gap exists at all. Some hold that there is an explanatory gap for now, but that it will eventually be closed. Some hold that the explanatory gap corresponds to an ontological gap in nature





 
Clark, Thomas W. (1995). Function and phenomenology: Closing the explanatory gap. Journal of Consciousness Studies 2:241-54.   (Cited by 13 | Annotation | Google)




  
Clark, Austen (online). I am Joe's explanatory gap.   (Google)
Abstract: _tableau_ can be given a full and satisfying explanation, while others cannot. We can explain in a full and satisfying way why the water in the mug is identical with H2O, why its liquidity is identical with a state of its molecular bonds, and why its heat is identical with its molecules being in motion. But we cannot explain in the same way why the neural processes which Joe undergoes when he looks at the mug are such as to make the mug look green, and not red. The latter explanations have gaps
 
Coleman, Sam (ms). Chalmers's Master Argument and Type Bb Physicalism.   (Google)
Abstract: Chalmers has provided a dilemmatic master argument against all forms of the phenomenal concept strategy. This paper explores a position that evades Chalmers's argument, dubbed Type Bb: it is for Type B physicalists who embrace horn b of Chalmers's dilemma. The discussion concludes that Chalmers fails to show any incoherence in the position of a Type B physicalist who depends on the phenomenal concept strategy.
 
Crane, Tim (online). Cosmic hermeneutics vs emergence: The challenge of the explanatory gap.   (Google)
Abstract: This paper is a defence of Terence Horgan’s claim that any genuinely physicalist position must distinguish itself from (what has been traditionally known as) emergentism. I argue that physicalism is necessarily reductive in character -- it must either give a reductive account of apparently non-physical entities, or a reductive explanation of why there are non-physical entities. I argue that many recent ‘nonreductive’ physicalists do not do this, and that because of this they cannot adequately distinguish their view from emergentism. The conclusion is that this is the real challenge posed by Joseph Levine’s ‘explanatory gap’ argument: if physicalists cannot close the explanatory gap in Levine’s preferred way, they must find some other way to do it. Otherwise their view is indistinguishable from emergentism
 
Dalton, Thomas C. (1998). The developmental gap in phenomenal experience: A comment on J. G. Taylor's "cortical activity and the explanatory gap''. J:Consciousness and cognition 7 (2):159-164. Consciousness and Cognition 7 (2):159-164.   (Google)
Abstract: J. G. Taylor advances an empirically testable local neural network model to understand the neural correlates of phenomenal experience. Taylor's model is better able to explain the presence (i.e., persistence, latency, and seamlessness) and unity of phenomenal consciousness which support the idea that consciousness is coherent, undivided, and centered. However, Taylor fails to offer a satisfactory explanation of the nonlinear relationship between local and global neural systems. In addition, the ontological assumptions that PE is immediate, intrinsic, and incorrigible limit an understanding of the different experiential forms consciousness takes during neurobehavioral development. Recent studies suggest that neurobehavioral development is discontinuous and that judgment emerges under conditions of uncertainty to render feeling and perception in equivalent terms of energy and behavior. Approaching the problem of phenomenal experience from a developmental perspective may help resolve the paradox of feeling infinitely close as well as distant from one's self
 
Dempsey, L. (2004). Conscious experience, reduction and identity: Many gaps, one solution. Philosophical Psychology 17 (2):225-246.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper considers the so-called explanatory gap between brain activity and conscious experience. A number of different, though closely related, explanatory gaps are distinguished and a monistic account of conscious experience, a version of Herbert Feigl's "dual-access theory," is advocated as a solution to the problems they are taken to pose for physicalist accounts of mind. Although dual-access theory is a version of the mind-body identity thesis, it in no way "eliminates" conscious experience; rather, it provides a parsimonious and explanatorily fruitful theory of the consciousness-body relation which faithfully preserves the nature of conscious experience while going quite far in "bridging" the various explanatory gaps distinguished below








 
Diaz-Leon, Esa (online). Can phenomenal concepts explain the explanatory gap?   (Google)
Abstract: One of the most important arguments against physicalism is the so-called conceivability argument. Intuitively, this argument claims that since certain statements concerning the separation of the physical and the phenomenal are conceivable, they are possible. This inference from conceivability to possibility has been challenged in numerous ways. One of these ways is the so-called phenomenal concept strategy, which has become one of the main strategies against the conceivability argument. David Chalmers says it “is perhaps the most attractive option for a physicalist to take in responding to the problem of consciousness”.2 Certainly, in the recent years, a multitude of proposals of that sort have been proposed and developed.3 However, Chalmers (2006) has recently argued that no version of the phenomenal concept strategy can succeed. In what follows, I will examine his argument for that conclusion, and I will argue that it is not sound. I will conclude that he has not posed any serious problem for the phenomenal concept strategy to succeed..
 
Diaz-Leon, Esa (2009). How many explanatory gaps are there? APA Newsletter on Philosophy and Computers 8 (2):33-35.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: According to many philosophers, there is an explanatory gap between physical truths and phenomenal truths. Someone could know all the physical truths about the world, and in particular, all the physical information about the brain and the neurophysiology of vision, and still not know what it is like to see red (Jackson 1982, 1986). According to a similar example, someone could know all the physical truths about bats and still not know what it is like to be a bat (Nagel 1974). We can conceive of an individual that is physically identical to me, molecule per molecule, but does not have any phenomenally conscious state whatsoever (Chalmers 1996). Some philosophers have argued that the explanatory gap shows that we cannot explain consciousness in physical terms (Levine 2001), or even that phenomenal consciousness is not physical and therefore physicalism is false (Chalmers 1996, 2002)





 
D'Oro, Giuseppina (2007). The gap is semantic, not epistemological. Ratio 20 (2):168ï¿½178.   (Google | More links) 




 
Draganescu, M. (1998). Taylor's bridge across the explanatory gap and its extension. Consciousness and Cognition 7 (2):165-168.   (Google | More links) 






 
Ellis, Ralph D. & Newton, Natika (1998). Three paradoxes of phenomenal consciousness: Bridging the explanatory gap. Journal of Consciousness Studies 5 (4):419-42.   (Cited by 52 | Google) 
 
Fischer, Eugen (2001). Unfair to physiology. Acta Analytica 16 (26):135-155.   (Google) 
 
Garson, James W. (1998). A commentary on "cortical activity and the explanatory gap". Consciousness and Cognition 7 (2):169-172.   (Google) 
 
Gertler, Brie (2001). The explanatory gap is not an illusion: A reply to Michael Tye. Mind 110 (439):689-694.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The claim that there is an explanatory gap between physical and phenomenal properties is perhaps the leading current challenge to materialist views about the mind. Tye tries to block this challenge, not by providing an explanation to bridge the gap but by denying that phenomenalphysical identities introduce an explanatory gap. Since an explanatory gap exists only if there is something unexplained that needs explaining, and something needs explaining only if it can be explained (whether or not it lies within the power of human-beings to explain it), there is no gap. (Tye ????, p. ???) Tyes strategy differs crucially from the claim that identities never stand in need of explanation because they constitute ultimate explanations; for he allows that identities such as water = H?O are explainable. Unlike WATER and H?O, which are descriptive concepts, phenomenal concepts are perspectival and hence irreducible to descriptive concepts, according to Tye. The fact that something picked out by a perspectival concept is identical to something picked out by a non-perspectival concept cannot be explained.1 So, he concludes, phenomenalphysical identities need not be explained






 
Gois, I. (2001). Understanding consciousness. Disputatio 10.   (Google) 
 
Griesmaier, Franz-Peter (2003). On explaining phenomenal consciousness. Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence 15 (2):227-242.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Gustafson, Donald F. (1998). Pain, qualia, and the explanatory gap. Philosophical Psychology 11 (3):371-387.   (Cited by 6 | Google)
Abstract: This paper investigates the status of the purported explanatory gap between pain phenomena and natural science, when the “gap” is thought to exist due to the special properties of experience designated by “qualia” or “the pain quale” in the case of pain experiences. The paper questions the existence of such a property in the case of pain by: (1) looking at the history of the conception of pain; (2) raising questions from empirical research and theory in the psychology of pain; (3) considering evidence from the neurophysiological systems of pain; (4) investigating the possible biological role or roles of pain; and (5) considering methodological questions of the comparable status of the results of the sciences of pain in contrast to certain intuitions underpinning “the explanatory gap” in the case of pain. Skepticism concerning the crucial underlying intuitions seems justified by these considerations
 
Hanfling, Oswald (2003). Wittgenstein and the problem of consciousness. Think 3.   (Google) 
 
Hardcastle, Valerie Gray (1998). Assuming away the explanatory gap. Consciousness and Cognition 7 (2):173-179.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 







 
Harman, Gilbert (online). Explaining an explanatory gap.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: Discussions of the mind-body problem often refer to an
 
Hardin, C. L. (1992). Physiology, phenomenology, and Spinoza's true colors. In Ansgar Beckermann, Hans Flohr & Jaegwon Kim (eds.), Emergence or Reduction?: Prospects for Nonreductive Physicalism. De Gruyter.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Hardin, C. L. (1987). Qualia and materialism: Closing the explanatory gap. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 48 (December):281-98.   (Cited by 14 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Harnad, Stevan (1994). Why and how we are not zombies. Journal of Consciousness Studies 1:164-67.   (Cited by 65 | Google | More links)
Abstract: A robot that is functionally indistinguishable from us may or may not be a mindless Zombie. There will never be any way to know, yet its functional principles will be as close as we can ever get to explaining the mind
















 
Hardcastle, Valerie Gray (1997). Why science is important for philosophy. Psycoloquy.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Levine (1997) claims that Locating Consciousness (1995) does not seriously address the problem of the explanatory gap; instead it merely provides lots of data. Here I argue that, contrary to the intuitions of some philosophers, the best remedy for our gaps in explanation and understanding is in fact through empirical investigation





 
Honderich, Ted (2000). Consciousness and inner tubes. Journal of Consciousness Studies 7 (7).   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Horgan, Terence E. (2006). Review of Levine's Purple Haze. Noûs 40 (3).   (Google | More links) 




 
Kline, J. P. (1998). Another opening in the explanatory gap. Consciousness and Cognition 7 (2):185-189.   (Google | More links) 





 
Krellenstein, Dr Marc (ms). Point of view: A modern nihilism.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Presents the author’s view of the best current positions on certain core philosophical and psychological problems. These positions together suggest a traditional nihilist perspective modified by evolutionary psychology and other contemporary thinking that accepts limitations on our understanding (rather than the conclusive non-existence of certain explanations), the psychological (if not absolute) reality of values, free will and other phenomena and our desire to live as best we can. The positions presented are: (1) the origin of the universe cannot be understood, (2) morality has no absolute rational foundation, (3) some people have unquestioned beliefs they view as absolute, (4) we don’t really have free will but can act as if we do, (5) brains are conscious but we don’t know how, (6) we live by relative values, biological dispositions, upbringing, habit and choice and (7) we don’t know how much we can modify ourselves, what makes us happy or what we value





 
Kriegel, Uriah (forthcoming). Self-Representationalism and the Explanatory Gap. In J. Liu & J. Perry (eds.), Consciousness and the Self: New Essays. Cambridge University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: According to the self-representational theory of consciousness – self- representationalism for short – a mental state is phenomenally conscious when, and only when, it represents itself in the right way. In this paper, I consider how self- representationalism might address the alleged explanatory gap between phenomenal consciousness and physical properties. I open with a presentation of self- representationalism and the case for it (§1). I then present what I take to be the most promising self-representational approach to the explanatory gap (§2). That approach is threatened, however, by an objection to self-representationalism, due to Levine, which I call the just more representation objection (§3). I close with a discussion of how the self-representationalist might approach the objection (§4).
 
Levin, Janet (1991). Analytic functionalism and the reduction of phenomenal states. Philosophical Studies 61 (March):211-38.   (Cited by 5 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Levine, Joseph (1983). Materialism and qualia: The explanatory gap. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 64 (October):354-61.   (Cited by 235 | Annotation | Google)




  
Levine, Joseph (1993). On leaving out what it's like. In Martin Davies & Glyn W. Humphreys (eds.), Consciousness: Psychological and Philosophical Essays. Blackwell.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Levine, Joseph (1993). On Leaving Out What It's Like. In Martin Davies & Glyn W. Humphreys (eds.), Consciousness: Psychological an Philosophical Essays.   (Google) 
 
Levine, Joseph (2001). Purple Haze: The Puzzle of Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 56 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Conscious experience presents a deep puzzle. On the one hand, a fairly robust materialism must be true in order to explain how it is that conscious events causally interact with non-conscious, physical events. On the other hand, we cannot explain how physical phenomena give rise to conscious experience. In this wide-ranging study, Joseph Levine explores both sides of the mind-body dilemma, presenting the first book-length treatment of his highly influential ideas on the "explanatory gap," the fact that we can't explain the nature of phenomenal experience in terms of its physical realization. He presents a careful argument that there is such a gap, and, after providing intriguing analyses of virtually all existing theories of consciousness, shows that recent attempts to close it fall short of the mark. Levine concludes that in the foreseeable future consciousness will remain a mystery






 
Loar, Brian (1999). Should the explanatory gap perplex us? In The Proceedings of the Twentieth World Congress of Philosophy, Volume 2: Metaphysics. Philosophy Documentation Center.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Lonky, M. L. (1998). Commentary on "cortical activity and the explanatory gap". Consciousness and Cognition 7 (2):190-192.   (Google) 
 
Lutz, Antoine (2004). Introduction—the explanatory gap: To close or to bridge? Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 3 (4).   (Google) 
 
Macdonald, C. (2004). Mary meets Molyneux: The explanatory gap and the individuation of phenomenal concepts. Noûs 38 (3):503-24.   (Google | More links) 





 
Manson, Neil Campbell (2002). Consciousness-dependence and the explanatory gap. Inquiry 45 (4):521-540.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Contrary to certain rumours, the mind-body problem is alive and well. So argues Joseph Levine in Purple Haze: The Puzzle of Consciousness . The main argument is simple enough. Considerations of causal efficacy require us to accept that subjective experiential, or 'phenomenal', properties are realized in basic non-mental, probably physical properties. But no amount of knowledge of those physical properties will allow us conclusively to deduce facts about the existence and nature of phenomenal properties. This failure of deducibility constitutes an explanatory problem - an explanatory gap - but does not imply the existence of immaterial mental properties. Levine introduced this notion of the explanatory gap almost two decades ago. Purple Haze allows Levine to situate the explanatory gap in a broader philosophical context. He engages with those who hold that the explanatory gap is best understood as implying anti-materialist metaphysical conclusions. But he also seeks to distance himself from contemporary naturalistic philosophical theorizing about consciousness by arguing that reductive and eliminative theories of consciousness all fail. Levine's work is best seen as an attempt to firmly establish a definite status for the mind-body problem, i.e. that the mind-body problem is a real, substantive epistemological problem but emphatically not a metaphysical one. Because Levine's work is tightly focused upon contemporary Anglophone analytic philosophy of mind, there is little discussion of the broader conceptual background to the mind-body problem. My aim here is to place Levine's work in a broader conceptual context. In particular, I focus on the relationship between consciousness and intentionality in the belief that doing so will allow us better to understand and evaluate Levine's arguments and their place in contemporary theorizing about mentality and consciousness







 
Montero, Barbara (2003). The epistemic/ontic divide. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 66 (2):404-418.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Morris, A. C. (1998). Commentary on ''cortical activity and the explanatory gap''. Consciousness and Cognition 7 (2):193-195.   (Google | More links) 





 
Moyal-Sharrock, Daniele (2000). Words as deeds: Wittgenstein's ''spontaneous utterances'' and the dissolution of the explanatory gap. Philosophical Psychology 13 (3):355 – 372.   (Google)
Abstract: Wittgenstein demystified the notion of ''observational self-knowledge''. He dislodged the long-standing conception that we have privileged access to our impressions, sensations and feelings through introspection, and more precisely eliminated knowing as the kind of awareness that normally characterizes our first-person present-tense psychological statements. He was not thereby questioning our awareness of our emotions or sensations, but debunking the notion that we come to that awareness via any epistemic route. This makes the spontaneous linguistic articulation of our sensations and impressions nondescriptive. Not descriptions, but expressions that seem more akin to behaviour than to language. I suggest that Wittgenstein uncovered a new species of speech acts. Far from the prearranged consecration of words into performatives, utterances are deeds through their very spontaneity. This gives language a new aura: the aura of the reflex action. I argue, against Peter Hacker, that spontaneous utterances have the categorial status of deeds. This has no reductive consequences in that I do not suggest that one category is reduced to another, but that the boundary between them is porous. This explodes the myth of an explanatory gap between the traditionally distinct categories of saying (or thinking) and doing, or of mind and body
 
Musacchio, J. M. (2002). Dissolving the explanatory gap: Neurobiological differences between phenomenal and propositional knowledge. Brain and Mind 3 (3):331-365.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The explanatory gap and theknowledge argument are rooted in the conflationof propositional and phenomenal knowledge. Thebasic knowledge argument is based on theconsideration that ``physical information'' aboutthe nervous system is unable to provide theknowledge of a ``color experience'' (Jackson,1982). The implication is that physicalism isincomplete or false because it leaves somethingunexplained. The problem with Jackson'sargument is that physical information has theform of highly symbolic propositional knowledgewhereas phenomenal knowledge consists in innateneurophysiological processes. In addition totheir fundamental epistemological differences,clinical, anatomical, pathological and brainimaging studies demonstrate that phenomenal andpropositional knowledge are fundamentallydifferent neurobiological processes. Propositional knowledge is phylogeneticallynew, highly symbolic, culturally acquired,exclusively human and expressible in differentnatural and artificial languages. By contrast,phenomenal knowledge (i.e.: knowingwhat-it-is-like to see a color) consists inqualitative experiences and phenomenal conceptsthat provide an internal, language-independentreference to the properties of objects and theneeds of the organism. Language andpropositional knowledge are exclusively humanattributes implemented in specific regions ofthe dominant hemisphere. This contrastssharply with the phylogenicallysensory areas that are common to animals andhumans, which implement qualitativeexperiences. Experiences are hard-wiredneurobiological processes that can neither betransmitted nor re-created through thesymbolism of propositions. Thus, I concludethat the fallacy in the explanatory gap and inthe knowledge argument is a fallacy ofequivocation that results from ignoringfundamental neurobiological differences betweenphenomenal and propositional knowledge








 
Nagasawa, Yujin (web). Formulating the explanatory gap. American Philosophical Association Newsletter on Philosophy and Computers.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The American Philosophical Association Newsletter on Philosophy and Computers. Harman






 
Neta, Ram (2004). Skepticism, abductivism, and the explanatory gap. Philosophical Perspectives 14 (1):296-325.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 





 
Fiala, Brian; Arico, Adam & Nichols, Shaun (ms). On the psychological origins of dualism: Dual-process cognition and the explanatory gap.   (Google)
Abstract: Consciousness often presents itself as a problem for materialists because no matter which physical explanation we consider, there seems to remain something about conscious experience that hasn't been fully explained. This gives rise to an apparent explanatory gap. The explanatory gulf between the physical and the conscious is reflected in the broader population, in which dualistic intuitions abound. Drawing on recent empirical evidence, this essay presents a dual-process cognitive model of consciousness attribution. This dual-process model, we suggest, provides an important part of the explanation for why dualism is so attractive and the explanatory gap so vexing
 
Nikolic, D. (1998). Commentary on ''cortical activity and the explanatory gap'' by John G. Taylor. Consciousness and Cognition 7 (2):196-201.   (Google | More links) 





 
Oberauer, Klaus (2001). The explanatory gap is still there. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24 (5):996-997.   (Google)
Abstract: I argue that O'Regan & Noë's (O&N's) theory is in a no better position than any other theory to solve the “hard problem” of consciousness. Getting rid of the explanatory gap by exchanging sensorimotor contingencies for neural representations is an illusion
 
Papineau, David (1998). Mind the gap. Philosophical Perspectives 12:373-89.   (Cited by 25 | Google | More links)
Abstract: On the first page of The Problem of Consciousness (1991), Colin McGinn asks "How is it possible for conscious states to depend on brain states? How can technicolour phenomenology arise from soggy grey matter?" Many philosophers feel that questions like these pose an unanswerable challenge to physicalism. They argue that there is no way of bridging the "explanatory gap" between the material brain and the lived world of conscious experience (Levine, 1983), and that physicalism about the mind can therefore provide no answer to the "hard problem" of why brains give rise to consciousness (Chalmers, 1996)









 
Pauen, Michael (1998). Is there an empirical answer to the explanatory gap argument? Consciousness and Cognition 7 (2):202-205.   (Google | More links) 






 
Polger, Thomas W. & Sufka, Kenneth J. (ms). Closing the gap on pain.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: A widely accepted theory holds that emotional experiences occur mainly in a part of the human brain called the amygdala. A different theory asserts that color sensation is located in a small subpart of the visual cortex called V4. If these theories are correct, or even approximately correct, then they are remarkable advances toward a scientific explanation of human conscious experience. Yet even understanding the claims of such theories





 
Polger, Thomas W. & Skipper, Robert B. (online). Naturalism, explanation, and identity.   (Google | More links) 






 
Polcyn, Karol (2006). Phenomenal consciousness and the explanatory gap. Diametros 6:49-69.   (Google) 
 
Polger, Thomas W. (ms). What the tortoise dreamt.   (Google) 
 
Price, Mark C. (1996). Should we expect to feel as if we understand consciousness? Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (4):303-12.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google)




  
Robinson, William S. (1998). A gap not bridged. Consciousness and Cognition 7 (2):210-211.   (Google | More links) 





 
Robbins, Philip & Jack, Anthony I. (2006). The phenomenal stance. Philosophical Studies 127 (1):59-85.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Cognitive science is shamelessly materialistic. It maintains that human beings are nothing more than complex physical systems, ultimately and completely explicable in mechanistic terms. But this conception of humanity does not ?t well with common sense. To think of the creatures we spend much of our day loving, hating, admiring, resenting, comparing ourselves to, trying to understand, blaming, and thanking -- to think of them as mere mechanisms seems at best counterintuitive and unhelpful. More often it may strike us as ludicrous, or even abhorrent. We are








 
Schilhab, T. S. S. (1998). Comments on ''cortical activity and the explanatory gap''. Consciousness and Cognition 7 (2):212-213.   (Google | More links) 





 
Scheele, M. (2002). Never mind the gap: The explanatory gap as an artifact of naive philosophical argument. Philosophical Psychology 15 (3):333-342.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: It is argued that the explanatory gap argument, according to which it is fundamentally impossible to explain qualitative mental states in a physicalist theory of mind, is unsound. The main argument in favour of the explanatory gap is presented, which argues that an identity statement of mind and brain has no explanatory force, in contrast to "normal" scientific identity statements. Then it is shown that "normal" scientific identity statements also do not conform to the demands set by the proponent of the explanatory gap. Rather than accept all such gaps, it is argued that we should deny the explanatory gap in a physicalist theory of mind







 
Schroer, Robert (forthcoming). Where's the Beef? Phenomenal Concepts as both Demonstrative and Substantial. The Australasian Journal of Philosophy.   (Google)
Abstract: One popular materialist response to the explanatory gap identifies phenomenal concepts with type-demonstrative concepts. This kind of response, however, faces a serious challenge: Our phenomenal concepts seem to provide a richer characterization of their referents than just the demonstrative characterization of ‘that quality’. In this paper, I develop a materialist account that beefs up the contents of phenomenal concepts while retaining the idea that these contents contain demonstrative elements. I illustrate this account by focusing on our phenomenal concepts of phenomenal colour. The phenomenal colours stand in a similarity space relative to one another in virtue of being complex qualities—qualities that contain saturation, lightness, and various aspects of hue as component elements. Our phenomenal concepts, in turn, provide a demonstrative characterization of each of these component elements as well as a description of how much of that element is present in a given phenomenal colour. The result is an account where phenomenal concepts contain demonstrative elements and yet provide a significantly richer characterization of the intrinsic nature of their referents than just ‘that quality’.
 
Seeger, Max (ms). The Reductive Explanation of Boiling Water in Levine's Explanatory Gap Argument.   (Google)
Abstract: This paper examines a paradigm case of allegedly successful reductive explanation, viz. the explanation of the fact that water boils at 100°C based on facts about H2O. The case figures prominently in Joseph Levine’s explanatory gap argument against physicalism. The paper studies the way the argument evolved in the writings of Levine, focusing especially on the question how the reductive explanation of boiling water figures in the argument. It will turn out that there are two versions of the explanatory gap argument to be found in Levine’s writings. The earlier version relies heavily on conceptual analysis and construes reductive explanation as a process of deduction. The later version makes do without conceptual analysis and understands reductive explanations as based on theoretic reductions that are justified by explanatory power. Along the way will be shown that the bridge principles — which are being neglected in the explanatory gap literature — play a crucial role in the explanatory gap argument.
 
Silberstein, Michael (2002). Reductive physicalism and the explanatory gap: A dilemma. In Peter K. Machamer & Michael Silberstein (eds.), Guide to the Philosophy of Science. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Smith, D. J. (1998). Commentary on ''cortical activity and the explanatory gap'' by J. G. Taylor. Consciousness and Cognition 7 (2):214-215.   (Google) 
 
Spencer, Cara (ms). Indexical Knowledge and Phenomenal Knowledge.   (Google)
Abstract: A familiar story about phenomenal knowledge likens it to indexical knowledge, i.e. knowledge about oneself typically expressed with sentences containing indexicals or demonstratives. The popularity of this sort of story owes in part to its promise of resolving some longstanding puzzles about phenomenal knowledge. One such puzzle arises from the compelling arguments that we can have full objective knowledge of the world while lacking some phenomenal knowledge. I argue that the widespread optimism about the indexical account on this score is unwarranted.
 
Stoyanov, Drozdstoj; Machamer, Peter & Schaffner, Kenneth, In Quest for scientific psychiatry: Towards bridging the explanatory gap.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The contemporary epistemic status of mental health disciplines does not allow the cross validation of mental disorders among various genetic markers, biochemical pathway or mechanisms, and clinical assessments in neuroscience explanations. We attempt to provide a meta-empirical analysis of the contemporary status of the cross-disciplinary issues existing between neuro-biology and psychopathology. Our case studies take as an established medical mode an example cross validation between biological sciences and clinical cardiology in the case of myocardial infarction. This is then contrasted with the incoherence between neuroscience and psychiatry in the case of bipolar disorders. We examine some methodological problems arising from the neuro-imaging studies, specifically the experimental paradigm introduced by the team of Wayne Drevets. Several theoretical objections are raised: temporal discordance, state independence, and queries about the reliability and specificity, and failure of convergent validity of the inter-disciplinary attempt. Both modern neuroscience and clinical psychology taken as separate fields have failed to reveal the explanatory mechanisms underlying mental disorders. The data acquired inside the mono-disciplinary matrices of neurobiology and psychopathology are deeply insufficient concerning their validity, reliability, and utility. Further, there haven’t been developed any effective trans-disciplinary connections between them. It raises the requirement for development of explanatory significant multi-disciplinary “meta-language” in psychiatry (Berrios, 2006, 2008). We attempt to provide a novel conceptual model for an integrative dialogue between psychiatry and neuroscience that actually includes criteria for cross-validation of the common used psychiatric categories and the different assessment methods. The major goal of our proactive program is the foundation of complementary “bridging” connections of neuroscience and psychopathology which may stabilize the cognitive meta-structure of the mental health knowledge. This entails bringing into synergy the disparate discourses of clinical psychology and neuroscience. One possible model accomplishment of this goal would be the synergistic (or at least compatible) integration of the knowledge under trans-disciplinary convergent cross-validation of the commonly used methods and notions






 
Sundstrom, Par (2007). Colour and consciousness: Untying the metaphysical knot. Philosophical Studies 136 (2):123-165.   (Google | More links) 





 
Sundström, Pär (2008). Is the mystery an illusion? Papineau on the problem of consciousness. Synthese 163 (2).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: A number of philosophers have recently argued that (i) consciousness properties are identical with some set of physical or functional properties and that (ii) we can explain away the frequently felt puzzlement about this claim as a delusion or confusion generated by our different ways of apprehending or thinking about consciousness. This paper examines David Papineau’s influential version of this view. According to Papineau, the difference between our “phenomenal” and “material” concepts of consciousness produces an instinctive but erroneous intuition that these concepts can’t co-refer. I claim that this account fails. To begin with, it is arguable that we are mystified about physicalism even when the account predicts that we shouldn’t be. Further, and worse, the account predicts that an “intuition of distinctness” will arise in cases where it clearly does not. In conclusion, I make some remarks on the prospects for, constraints on, and (physicalist) alternatives to, a successful defence of the claim (ii)






 
Taylor, John G. (1998). Cortical activity and the explanatory gap. Consciousness and Cognition 7 (2):109-48.   (Cited by 14 | Google | More links)
Abstract: An exploration is given of neural network features now being uncovered in cortical processing which begins to go a little way to help bridge the ''Explanatory Gap'' between phenomenal consciousness and correlated brain activity. A survey of properties suggested as being possessed by phenomenal consciousness leads to a set of criteria to be required of the correlated neural activity. Various neural styles of processing are reviewed and those fitting the criteria are selected for further analysis. One particular processing style, in which semiautonomous and long-lasting cortical activity ''bubbles'' are created by input, is selected as being the most appropriate. Further experimental criteria are used to help narrow the possible neural styles involved. This leads to a class of neural models underpinning phenomenal consciousness and to a related set of testable predictions







 
Tye, Michael (2001). Oh yes it is. Mind 110 (439):695-697.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 




 
Tye, Michael (1999). Phenomenal consciousness: The explanatory gap as a cognitive illusion. Mind 108 (432):705-25.   (Cited by 35 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The thesis that there is a troublesome explanatory gap between the phenomenal aspects of experiences and the underlying physical and functional states is given a number of different interpretations. It is shown that, on each of these interpretations, the thesis is false. In supposing otherwise, philosophers have fallen prey to a cognitive illusion, induced largely by a failure to recognize the special character of phenomenal concepts








 
Unwin, Nicholas (ms). Explaining Colour Phenomenology: Reduction versus Connection.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: A major part of the mind–body problem is to explain why a given set of physical processes should give rise to qualia of one sort rather than another. Colour hues are the usual example considered here, and there is a lively debate between, for example, Hardin, Levine, Jackson, Clark and Chalmers as to whether the results of colour vision science can provide convincing explanations of why colours actually look the way they do. This paper examines carefully the type of explanation that is needed here, and it is concluded that it does not have to be reductive to be effective. What needs to be explained more than anything is why inverted hue scenarios are more intuitive than other sensory inversions: and the issue of physicalism versus dualism is only of marginal relevance here.





 
van Gulick, Robert (2000). Closing the gap? Journal of Consciousness Studies 7 (4):93-97.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
van Gulick, Robert (2003). Maps, gaps, and traps. In Quentin Smith & Aleksandar Jokic (eds.), Consciousness: New Philosophical Perspectives. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
van der Heijden, A. H. C.; Hudson, P. T. W. & Kurvink, A. G. (1997). On widening the explanatory gap. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 20 (1):157-158.   (Google)
Abstract: The explanatory gap refers to the lack of concepts for understanding “how it is that . . . a state of consciousness comes about as a result of irritating nervous tissue.” By assuming that there are colours in the outside world, Block needlessly widens this gap and Lycan and Kitcher simply fail to see the gap. When such assumptions are abandoned, an unnecessary and incomprehensible constraint disappears. It then becomes clear that the brain can use its own neural language for representing aspects of the outside world. While this may not close the gap, it becomes clearer where we need new concepts
 
van Gulick, Robert (1999). Taking a step back from the gap. In The Proceedings of the Twentieth World Congress of Philosophy, Volume 2: Metaphysics. Bowling Green: Philosophy Doc Ctr.   (Google) 
 
Webster, W. R. (2002). A case of mind/brain identity: One small bridge for the explanatory gap. Synthese 131 (2):275-287.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Webster, W. R. (2003). Revelation and transparency in colour vision refuted: A case of mind/brain identity and another bridge over the explanatory gap. Synthese 133 (3):419-39.   (Google)
Abstract:   Russell (1912) and others have argued that the real nature of colour is transparentto us in colour vision. It's nature is fully revealed to us and no further knowledgeis theoretically possible. This is the doctrine of revelation. Two-dimensionalFourier analyses of coloured checkerboards have shown that apparently simple,monadic, colours can be based on quite different physical mechanisms. Experimentswith the McCollough effect on different types of checkerboards have shown thatidentical colours can have energy at the quite different orientations of Fourierharmonic components but no energy at the edges of the checkerboards, thusrefuting revelation. It is concluded that this effect is not explained by a superveniencedispositional account of colour as proposed by McGinn (1996). It was argued that theMcCollough effect in checkerboards was an example of a local mind/body reduction(Kim 1993), by which the different characteristics of identical colours falsifies revelation. This reduction being based on both physical and neurological mechanisms led to a clear explanation of the perceive phenomenal effects and thus laid a small bridge over the explanatory gap
 
1.2d `Hard' and `Easy' Problems




Alter, Torin (forthcoming). The hard problem of consciousness. In T. Bayne, A. Cleeremans & P. Wilken (eds.), Oxford Companion to Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: As I type these words, cognitive systems in my brain engage in visual and auditory information processing. This processing is accompanied by subjective states of consciousness, such as the auditory experience of hearing the tap-tap-tap of the keyboard and the visual experience of seeing the letters appear on the screen. How does the brain's activity generate such experiences? Why should it be accompanied by conscious experience in the first place? This is the hard problem of consciousness
 
Arvan, Marcus (1998). Out with Qualia and in with Consciousness: Why the Hard Problem is a Myth. Dissertation, Tufts Honours Thesis   (Google)
Abstract: The subjective features of conscious mental processes--as opposed to their physical causes and effects--cannot be captured by the purified form of thought suitable for dealing with the physical world that underlies appearances." (Nagel, in Dennett, 1991, p. 372)
 
Bilodeau, D. (1996). Physics, machines, and the hard problem. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (5-6):386-401.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Block, Ned (2002). The harder problem of consciousness. Journal of Philosophy 99 (8):391-425.   (Cited by 23 | Google | More links)
Abstract: consciousness comes about as a result of irritating nervous tissue, is just as unaccountable as the appearance of Djin when Aladdin rubbed his lamp









 
Brooks, David (2000). How to solve the hard problem: A predictable inexplicability. Psyche 6 (4):5-20.   (Google) 
 
Chalmers, David J. (1996). Can consciousness be reductively explained? In The Conscious Mind. Oxford University Press.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Chalmers, David J. (1995). Facing up to the problem of consciousness. [Journal (Paginated)] 2 (3):200-19.   (Cited by 499 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: To make progress on the problem of consciousness, we have to confront it directly. In this paper, I first isolate the truly hard part of the problem, separating it from more tractable parts and giving an account of why it is so difficult to explain. I critique some recent work that uses reductive methods to address consciousness, and argue that such methods inevitably fail to come to grips with the hardest part of the problem. Once this failure is recognized, the door to further progress is opened. In the second half of the paper, I argue that if we move to a new kind of nonreductive explanation, a naturalistic account of consciousness can be given. I put forward my own candidate for such an account: a nonreductive theory based on principles of structural coherence and organizational invariance, and a double-aspect theory of information
































 
Chalmers, David J. (1997). Moving forward on the problem of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 4 (1):3-46.   (Cited by 37 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: This paper is a response to the 26 commentaries on my paper "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness". First, I respond to deflationary critiques, including those that argue that there is no "hard" problem of consciousness or that it can be accommodated within a materialist framework. Second, I respond to nonreductive critiques, including those that argue that the problems of consciousness are harder than I have suggested, or that my framework for addressing them is flawed. Third, I address positive proposals for addressing the problem of consciousness, including those based in neuroscience and cognitive science, phenomenology, physics, and fundamental psychophysical theories. Reply to: Baars, Bilodeau, Churchland, Clark, Clarke, Crick & Koch, Dennett, Hameroff & Penrose, Hardcastle, Hodgson, Hut & Shepard, Libet, Lowe, MacLennan, McGinn, Mills, O'Hara & Scutt, Price, Robinson, Rosenberg, Seager, Shear, Stapp, Varela, Velmans











 
Chalmers, David J. (2007). The hard problem of consciousness. In Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Chalmers, David J. (1995). The puzzle of conscious experience. Scientific American 273 (6):80-86.   (Cited by 89 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: Conscious experience is at once the most familiar thing in the world and the most mysterious. There is nothing we know about more directly than consciousness, but it is extraordinarily hard to reconcile it with everything else we know. Why does it exist? What does it do? How could it possibly arise from neural processes in the brain? These questions are among the most intriguing in all of science










 
Chalmers, David J. (1998). The problems of consciousness. In H. Jasper, L. Descarries, V. Castellucci & S. Rossignol (eds.), Consciousness: At the Frontiers of Neuroscience. Lippincott-Raven.   (Cited by 10 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper is an edited transcription of a talk at the 1997 Montreal symposium on "Consciousness at the Frontiers of Neuroscience". There's not much here that isn't said elsewhere, e.g. in "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness" and "How Can We Construct a Science of Consciousness?"]]







 
Churchland, Patricia S. (1996). The hornswoggle problem. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (5-6):402-8.   (Cited by 20 | Annotation | Google)




  
Clark, Thomas W. (1995). Function and phenomenology: Closing the explanatory gap. Journal of Consciousness Studies 2:241-54.   (Cited by 13 | Annotation | Google)




  
Cleeremans, Axel (1998). The other hard problem: How to bridge the gap between subsymbolic and symbolic cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 21 (1):22-23.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The constructivist notion that features are purely functional is incompatible with the classical computational metaphor of mind. I suggest that the discontent expressed by Schyns, Goldstone and Thibaut about fixed-features theories of categorization reflects the growing impact of connectionism, and show how their perspective is similar to recent research on implicit learning, consciousness, and development. A hard problem remains, however: How to bridge the gap between subsymbolic and symbolic cognition











 
Cotterill, Rodney M. J. (2003). Conscious unity, emotion, dreaming, and the solution of the hard problem. In Axel Cleeremans (ed.), The Unity of Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Crick, Francis & Koch, Christof (1995). Why neuroscience may be able to explain consciousness. Scientific American 273 (6):84-85.   (Cited by 17 | Annotation | Google)




  
Dempsey, L. (2002). Chalmers's fading and dancing qualia: Consciousness and the "hard problem". Southwest Philosophy Review 18 (2):65-80.   (Google) 
 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1996). Commentary on Chalmers "facing backwards on the problem of consciousness". [Journal (Paginated)].   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The strategy of divide and conquer is usually an excellent one, but it all depends on how you do the carving. Chalmer's attempt to sort the "easy" problems of consciousness from the "really hard" problem is not, I think, a useful contribution to research, but a major misdirector of attention, an illusion-generator. How could this be? Let me describe two somewhat similar strategic proposals, and compare them to Chalmers' recommendation





 
Dennett, Daniel C. (2003). Explaining the "magic" of consciousness. Journal of Cultural and Evolutionary Psychology 1 (1):7-19.   (Google) 
 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1996). Facing backwards on the problem of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (1):4-6.   (Cited by 29 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 






 
Dournaee, Blake H. (2010). Comments on “the replication of the hard problem of consciousness in ai and bio-ai”. Minds and Machines 20 (2).   (Google)
Abstract: In their joint paper entitled “ The Replication of the Hard Problem of Consciousness in AI and BIO - AI ” (Boltuc et al. Replication of the hard problem of conscious in AI and Bio- AI: An early conceptual framework 2008 ), Nicholas and Piotr Boltuc suggest that machines could be equipped with phenomenal consciousness, which is subjective consciousness that satisfies Chalmer’s hard problem (We will abbreviate the hard problem of consciousness as “H-consciousness”). The claim is that if we knew the inner workings of phenomenal consciousness and could understand its’ precise operation, we could instantiate such consciousness in a machine. This claim, called the extra - strong AI thesis, is an important claim because if true it would demystify the privileged access problem of first-person consciousness and cast it as an empirical problem of science and not a fundamental question of philosophy. A core assumption of the extra-strong AI thesis is that there is no logical argument that precludes the implementation of H-consciousness in an organic or in-organic machine provided we understand its algorithm. Another way of framing this conclusion is that there is nothing special about H-consciousness as compared to any other process. That is, in the same way that we do not preclude a machine from implementing photosynthesis, we also do not preclude a machine from implementing H-consciousness. While one may be more difficult in practice, it is a problem of science and engineering, and no longer a philosophical question. I propose that Boltuc’s conclusion, while plausible and convincing, comes at a very high price; the argument given for his conclusion does not exclude any conceivable process from machine implementation. In short, if we make some assumptions about the equivalence of a rough notion of algorithm and then tie this to human understanding, all logical preconditions vanish and the argument grants that any process can be implemented in a machine. The purpose of this paper is to comment on the argument for his conclusion and offer additional properties of H-consciousness that can be used to make the conclusion falsifiable through scientific investigation rather than relying on the limits of human understanding
 
Duch, Włodzisław (2001). Facing the hard question. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24 (1):187-188.   (Google)
Abstract: The following questions are considered: Why is it difficult to create a theory of consciousness? What are the contents of consciousness? What kind of theory is acceptable as transparent? and, What is the value of conscious experience?
 
Dupre, John (2009). Hard and easy questions about consciousness. In P. M. S. Hacker, Hans-Johann Glock & John Hyman (eds.), Wittgenstein and Analytic Philosophy: Essays for P.M.S. Hacker. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Eilan, Naomi M. (2000). Primitive consciousness and the 'hard problem'. Journal of Consciousness Studies 7 (4):28-39.   (Google) 
 
Elitzur, Avshalom C. (2009). Consciousness makes a difference: A reluctant dualist’s confession. In A. Batthyany & A. C. Elitzur (eds.), Irreducibly Conscious: Selected Papers on Consciousness.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper’s outline is as follows. In sections 1-3 I give an exposi¬tion of the Mind-Body Problem, with emphasis on what I believe to be the heart of the problem, namely, the Percepts-Qualia Nonidentity and its incompatibility with the Physical Closure Paradigm. In 4 I present the “Qualia Inaction Postulate” underlying all non-interactionist theo¬ries that seek to resolve the above problem. Against this convenient postulate I propose in section 5 the “Bafflement Ar¬gument,” which is this paper's main thesis. Sections 6-11 critically dis¬cuss attempts to dismiss the Bafflement Argument by the “Baf¬flement=Mis¬perception Equation.” Section 12 offers a refutation of all such attempts in the form of a concise “Asymmetry Proof.” Section 13 points out the bearing of the Bafflement Argument on the evolutionary role of consciousness while section 14 acknowledges the price that has to be paid for it in terms of basic physical principles. Section 15 summarizes the paper, pointing out the inescapability of interactionist dualism.






 
Gao, Mr Shan (ms). Quantum, consciousness and panpsychism: A solution to the hard problem.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: We analyze the results and implications of the combination of quantum and consciousness in terms of the recent QSC analysis. The quantum effect of consciousness is first explored. We show that the consciousness of the observer can help to distinguish the nonorthogonal states under some condition, while the usual physical measuring device without consciousness can’t. The result indicates that the causal efficacies of consciousness do exist when considering the basic quantum process. Based on this conclusion, we demonstrate that consciousness is not reducible or emergent, but a new fundamental property of matter. This provides a quantum basis for panpsychism. Furthermore, we argue that the conscious process is one kind of quantum computation process based on the analysis of consciousness time and combination problem. It is shown that a unified theory of matter and consciousness should include two parts: one is the complete quantum evolution of matter state, which includes the definite nonlinear evolution element introduced by consciousness, and the other is the psychophysical principle or corresponding principle between conscious content and matter state. Lastly, some experimental suggestions are presented to confirm the theoretical analysis of the paper








 
Gray, Jeffrey A. (2004). Consciousness: Creeping Up on the Hard Problem. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 24 | Google | More links) 





 
Gray, Jeffrey A. (1998). Creeping up on the hard question of consciousness. In Stuart R. Hameroff, Alfred W. Kaszniak & A. C. Scott (eds.), Toward a Science of Consciousness II. MIT Press.   (Cited by 7 | Google) 
 
Gray, Jeffrey A. (2005). Synesthesia: A window on the hard problem of consciousness. In Lynn C. Robertson & Noam Sagiv (eds.), Synesthesia: Perspectives From Cognitive Neuroscience. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Harnad, Stevan (2000). Correlation vs. causality: How/why the mind-body problem is hard. Journal of Consciousness Studies 7 (4):54-61.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The Mind/Body Problem (M/BP) is about causation not correlation. And its solution (if there is one) will require a mechanism in which the mental component somehow manages to play a causal role of its own, rather than just supervening superflously on other, nonmental components that look, for all the world, as if they can do the full causal job perfectly well without it. Correlations confirm that M does indeed "supervene" on B, but causality is needed to show how/why M is not supererogatory; and that's the hard part














 
Harnad, Stevan (2001). Explaining the mind: Problems, problems. [Journal (Paginated)] 41:36-42.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The mind/body problem is the feeling/function problem: How and why do feeling systems feel? The problem is not just "hard" but insoluble (unless one is ready to resort to telekinetic dualism). Fortunately, the "easy" problems of cognitive science (such as the how and why of categorization and language) are not insoluble. Five books (by Damasio, Edelman/Tononi, McGinn, Tomasello and Fodor) are reviewed in this context












 
Harnad, Stevan (2001). No easy way out. [Journal (Paginated)].   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The mind/body problem is the feeling/function problem: How and why do feeling systems feel? The problem is not just "hard" but insoluble (unless one is ready to resort to telekinetic dualism). Fortunately, the "easy" problems of cognitive science (such as the how and why of categorization and language) are not insoluble. Five books (by Damasio, Edelman/Tononi, McGinn, Tomasello and Fodor) are reviewed in this context





 
Harnad, Stevan (1998). The hardships of cognitive science. [Journal (Paginated)].   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Comments on David Chalmers's "hard problem" and some unsuccessful attempts to solve it





 
Hodgson, David (1996). The easy problems ain't so easy. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (1):69-75.   (Cited by 8 | Annotation | Google)




  
Hodes, Greg P. (2005). What would it "be like" to solve the hard problem?: Cognition, consciousness, and qualia zombies. Neuroquantology 3 (1):43-58.   (Google) 
 
Hohwy, Jakob (2004). Evidence, explanation, and experience: On the harder problem of consciousness. Journal of Philosophy 101 (5):242-254.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Creatures that have different physical realizations than human beings may or may not be conscious. Ned Block’s ‘harder problem of consciousness’ is that naturalistic phenomenal realists have no conception of a rational ground for belief that they have or have not discovered consciousness in such a creature. Drawing on the notion of inference to the best explanation, it appears the arguments to these conclusions beg the question and ignore that explanation may be a guide to discovery. Thus, best explanation can both validate an interpretation of the evidence and lead to the discovery of consciousness.






 
Horst, Steven (1999). Evolutionary explanation and the hard problem of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 6 (1):39-48.   (Cited by 8 | Google) 
 
Horgan, Terry (2009). Materialism, minimal emergentism, and the hard problem of consciousness. In Robert C. Koons & George Bealer (eds.), The Waning of Materialism: New Essays. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Howell, Robert J. (online). The Hard Problem of Consciousness. Scholarpedia.   (Google) 
 
Hutto, Daniel D. (2006). Turning hard problems on their heads. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 5 (1):75-88.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Much of the dif?culty in assessing theories of consciousness stems from their advo- cates not supplying adequate or convincing characterisations of the phenomenon (or data) they hope to explain. Yet, to make any reasonable assessment this is precisely what is required, for it is not as if our







 
Hut, Piet & Shepard, Roger N. (1996). Turning the "hard problem" upside-down and sideways. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (4):313-29.   (Cited by 15 | Annotation | Google)




  
Ismael, Jenann (1999). Science and the phenomenal. Philosophy of Science 66 (3):351-69.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links) 






 
Jack, Anthony; Robbins, Philip & Roepstorff, and Andreas (online). The genuine problem of consciousness.   (Google)
Abstract: Those who are optimistic about the prospects of a science of consciousness, and those who believe that it lies beyond the reach of standard scientific methods, have something in common: both groups view consciousness as posing a special challenge for science. In this paper, we take a close look at the nature of this challenge. We show that popular conceptions of the problem of consciousness, epitomized by David Chalmers’ formulation of the ‘hard problem’, can be best explained as a cognitive illusion, which arises as a by-product of our cognitive architecture. We present evidence from numerous sources to support our claim that we have a specialized system for thinking about phenomenal states, and that an inhibitory relationship exists between this system and the system we use to think about physical mechanisms. Even though the ‘hard problem’ is an illusion, unfortunately it appears that our cognitive architecture forces a closely related problem upon us. The ‘genuine problem’ of consciousness shares many features with the hard problem, and it also represents a special challenge for psychology. Nonetheless, researchers should be careful not to mistake the hard problem for the genuine problem, since the strategies appropriate for dealing with these problems differ in important respects
 
Kirsh, Marvin Eli, The hard problem of consciousness studies.   (Google)
Abstract:      The question addressed by the hard problem of philosophy (3), how cognitive representation is acquired from the physical properties of self and the external, is examined from a perspective originating with Boethius(14) that knowledge is dependant on the nature of the perceiver and discussed with respect to the philosophy of George Berkeley (1,2,7) concerning the existence of matter with respect to perception. An account of the trails of history, scientific method, with respect to the naming and delineation of the hard problem suggest that its topic of address is a factor of plural elements-perceived as singular, a monism, only an aspect of its universality is perceived. A surface aspect is what seduces scientifically and, as a result, a confusion involving excessive abstraction and perceptually absent empirical fact, is postulated to accompany a false morality-an inclination to conquer it from scientific method is attributed to a seduction by naturally existing perplexity that is intermingled with unknown physical elements, themselves rooted from the same singular perplexity such that an ensuing interrogation targeted at the physical world and unavoidingly overlapping with the strictly philosophical has taken place. An invisible paper thin but sharp and self denigrating third facet to the commonly known philosophical walls, within the perplexing and the logical incongruence's, an artifact of perception and modeling of nature, results in a combined scientific (physical) and philosophical (reflective) assailing of natural paradox in a pursuit to summit human sufferings that are suggested to be, at least in part, of an unnatural and physical origin. Included as a conceptual tool is a section that discusses all possible human behavior as intuitively contained by the set of all the possible paths of nature emerged up to present and continued to emerge
 
Lewis, Harry A. (1998). Consciousness: Inexplicable - and useless too? Journal of Consciousness Studies 5 (1):59-66.   (Google) 
 
Libet, Benjamin W. (1996). Solutions to the hard problem of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (1):33-35.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google)




  
Lipkin, Michael (2005). The field concept in current models of consciousness: A tool for solving the hard problem? Mind and Matter 3 (2):29-85.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 




 
Lloyd, Peter (online). Berkeley revisited: The hard problem considered easy.   (Google)
Abstract: The philosophical mind-body problem, which Chalmers has named the 'Hard Problem', concerns the nature of the mind and the body. Physicalist approaches have been explored intensively in recent years but have brought us no consensual solution. Dualistic approaches have also been scrutinised since Descartes, but without consensual success. Mentalism has received little attention, yet it offers an elegantly simple solution to the hard problem
 
Lowe, E. J. (1995). There are no easy problems of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 2:266-71.   (Cited by 11 | Annotation | Google)




  
MacLennan, Bruce J. (1996). The elements of consciousness and their neurodynamical correlates. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (5):409-424.   (Cited by 10 | Google | More links) 






 
Mandik, Pete (2008). An epistemological theory of consciousness? In Alessio Plebe & Vivian De La Cruz (eds.), Philosophy in the Neuroscience Era. Squilibri.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This article tackles problems concerning the reduction of phenomenal consciousness to brain processes that arise in consideration of specifically epistemological properties that have been attributed to conscious experiences. In particular, various defenders of dualism and epiphenomenalism have argued for their positions by assuming special epistemic access to phenomenal consciousness. Many physicalists have reacted to such arguments by denying the epistemological premises. My aim in this paper is to take a different approach in opposing dualism and argue that when we correctly examine both the phenomenology and neural correlates of phenomenal consciousness we will see that granting the epistemological premises of special access are the best hope for a scientific study of consciousness. I argue that essential features of consciousness involve both their knowability by the subject of experience as well as their egocentricity, that is, their knowability by the subject as belonging to the subject. I articulate a neuroscientifically informed theory of phenomenal consciousness






 
Mashour, George A. & LaRock, Eric (forthcoming). Inverse Zombies, Anesthesia Awareness, and the Hard Problem of Unconsciousness. Consciousness and Cognition.   (Google)
Abstract: Philosophical (p-) zombies are constructs that possess all of the behavioral features and responses of a sentient human being, yet are not conscious. P-zombies are intimately linked to the hard problem of consciousness and have been invoked as arguments against physicalist approaches. But what if we were to invert the characteristics of p-zombies? Such an inverse (i-) zombie would possess all of the behavioral features and responses of an insensate being yet would nonetheless be conscious. While p-zombies are logically possible but naturally improbable, an approximation of i-zombies actually exists: individuals experiencing what is referred to as “anesthesia awareness.” Patients under general anesthesia may be intubated (preventing speech), paralyzed (preventing movement), and narcotized (minimizing response to nociceptive stimuli). Thus, they appear—and typically are—unconscious. In 1-2 cases/1000, however, patients may be aware of intraoperative events, sometimes without any objective indices. Furthermore, a much higher percentage of patients (22% in a recent study) may have the subjective experience of dreaming during general anesthesia. P-zombies confront us with the hard problem of consciousness—how do we explain the presence of qualia? I-zombies present a more practical problem—how do we detect the presence of qualia? The current investigation compares p-zombies to i-zombies and explores the “hard problem” of unconsciousness with a focus on anesthesia awareness.
 
McFadden, J. (2002). The conscious electromagnetic information (cemi) field theory: The hard problem made easy? Journal of Consciousness Studies 9 (8):45-60.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links) 




 
McFadden, J. (2002). The conscious electromagnetic field: The hard problem made easy? Journal of Consciousness Studies.   (Google) 
 
McLaughlin, Brian P. (2003). A naturalist-phenomenal realist response to Block's harder problem. Philosophical Issues 13 (1):163-204.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links)
Abstract: widely held commitments: to phenomenal realism and to naturalism. Phenomenal realism is the view that (a) we are phenomenally consciousness, and that (b) there is no a priori or armchair sufficient condition for phenomenal consciousness that can be stated (non- circularly) in nonphenomenal terms (p.392).1,2 Block points out that while phenomenal realists reject






 
Mills, Eugene O. (1996). Giving up on the hard problem of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (1):26-32.   (Cited by 4 | Annotation | Google)




  
Mills, Frederick B. (1998). The easy and hard problems of consciousness: A cartesian perspective. Journal of Mind and Behavior 19 (2):119-40.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
O'Hara, Kieron & Scutt, Tom (1996). There is no hard problem of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (4):290-302.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Peterson, Gregory R. (2009). A hard problem indeed. Zygon 44 (1):19-29.   (Google)
Abstract: Owen Flanagan's The Really Hard Problem provides a rich source of reflection on the question of meaning and ethics within the context of philosophical naturalism. I affirm the title's claim that the quest to find meaning in a purely physical universe is indeed a hard problem by addressing three issues: Flanagan's claim that there can be a scientific/empirical theory of ethics (eudaimonics), that ethics requires moral glue, and whether, in the end, Flanagan solves the hard problem. I suggest that he does not, although he provides much that is of importance and useful for further reflection along the way
 
Pharoah, Mark (ms). 'Thing-in-itself' - Exploring the relationship between phenomenal experience and the phenomenon of consciousness.   (Google)
Abstract: If one were to provide a reductive explanation of phenomenal experience one would explain why there could be a phenomenal experience that identifies itself as an individual that possesses ‘consciousness’. Although not a requirement of reduction, such an explanation would be consistent with our understanding of evolution and, consequently, explain the physical origins and purpose of phenomenal experience. However, this explanation would not explain why a particular conscious individual identifies itself as itself rather than any other individual - Why is ‘my’ consciousness ‘mine’ (materially, or otherwise, irrespective of experiential detail and content) rather than anyone else? What is consciousness outside of phenomenal experience and phenomenal conceptualization? In this paper, I argue that the indeterminacy of quantum mechanics makes it a suitable candidate for exploring the answers to these questions.
 
Platchias, Dimitris (2008). Experiencing a Hard Problem? Teorema (3):115-30.   (Google) 
 
Polger, Thomas W. & Flanagan, Owen J. (online). Explaining the evolution of consciousness: The other hard problem.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Recently some philosophers interested in consciousness have begun to turn their attention to the question of what evolutionary advantages, if any, being conscious might confer on an organism. The issue has been pressed in recent dicussions involving David Chalmers, Todd Moody, Owen Flanagan and Thomas Polger, Daniel Dennett, and others. The purpose of this essay is to consider some of the problems that face anyone who wants to give an evolutionary explanation of consciousness. We begin by framing the problem in the context of some current debates. Then we







 
Robinson, William S. (1996). The hardness of the hard problem. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (1):14-25.   (Cited by 8 | Google) 
 
Rockwell, Teed, Commentary on a hard problem thought experiment.   (Google)
Abstract: In the seventh paragraph of the post, you say "This question [which machine, if any or both, is conscious/] seems to be in principle unfalsifiable, and yet genuinely meaningful." (I'm assuming that you mean that any answer to it is unfalsifiable.) My neo-Carnapian intuitions diagnoses the problem right at this point. Forget about attributions of meaningless and all that stuff. Replace it in your statement with more pragmatically-oriented evaluative notions: theoretically fruitless, arbitray without even being helpful for any theoretical, experimental, or practical purpose, and so on. Any answer to the question will be those. Thus the question is not worth pursuing, especially since the thought experiment is science fiction right now. A much more useful way to spend one's time is addressing frutiful questions, like the ones involved in constructing your postulated robots, or investigating neural mechanisms, and so on. So acknowledge the connection between unfalsifiability/verifiability/confirmability and theoretical and practical worthlessness (rather than "meaningless"). Then get on with the theoretically and empirically worthwhile questions. Many of the latter are quiter abstract and "philosophical," anyway (about the scope and limits of various methodologies, existing theories, and so on). Aren't those enough to occupy even the most abstract theorist's attention? Why puzzle about questions whose answers can't be rationally justified?
 
Rockwell, Teed (ms). The hard problem is dead: Long live the hard problem.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: I have assumed that consciousness exists, and that to redefine the problem as that of explaining how certain cognitive and behavioral functions are performed is unacceptable. . . .Like many people (materialists and dualists alike), I find this premise obvious, although I can no more "prove" it than I can prove that I am conscious. . . .there is no denying that such arguments - on either side - ultimately come down to a bedrock of intuition at some point. (Chalmers undated)





 
Rosenberg, Gregg H. (1996). Rethinking nature: A hard problem within the hard problem. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (1):76-88.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google)




  
Samsonovich, Alexei V.; Ascoli, Giorgio A.; Morowitz, Harold & Kalbfleisch, M. Layne (forthcoming). A scientific perspective on the hard problem of consciousness. In Benjamin Goertzel & Pei Wang (eds.), Advances in Artificial General Intelligence: Concepts, Architectures and Algorithms. Proceedings of the AGI Workshop 2008. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications. IOS Press: Amsterdam.   (Google) 
 
Shear, Jonathan (ed.) (1997). Explaining Consciousness: The Hard Problem. MIT Press.   (Cited by 60 | Annotation | Google)





Abstract: In this book philosophers, physicists, psychologists, neurophysiologists, computer scientists, and others address this central topic in the growing discipline...
 
Shear, Jonathan (1996). The hard problem: Closing the empirical gap. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (1):54-68.   (Cited by 13 | Annotation | Google)




  
Smart, J. J. C. (2004). Consciousness and awareness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 11 (2):41-50.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Stapp, Henry P. (1997). Science of consciousness and the hard problem. Journal of Mind and Behavior 18 (2-3):171-93.   (Cited by 18 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Quantum theory can be regarded as a rationally coherent theory of the interaction of mind and matter and it allows our conscious thoughts to play a causally e cacious and necessary role in brain dynamics It therefore provides a natural basis created by scientists for the science of consciousness As an illustration it is explained how the interaction of brain and consciousness can speed up brain processing and thereby enhance the survival prospects of conscious organisms as compared to similar organisms that lack consciousness As a second illustration it is explained how within the quantum framework the consciously experi enced I directs the actions of a human being It is concluded that contemporary science already has an adequate framework for incorporat ing causally e cacious experiential events into the physical universe in a manner that puts the neural correlates of consciousness into the theory in a well de ned way explains in principle how the e ects of consciousness per se can enhance the survival prospects of organisms that possess it allows this survival e ect to feed into phylogenetic de velopment and explains how the consciously experienced I can direct human behaviour..







 
Stapp, Henry P. (1995). The hard problem: A quantum approach. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (3):194-210.   (Cited by 25 | Google | More links) 







 
Thomas, Nigel J. T. (2001). Color realism: Toward a solution to the "hard problem". Consciousness And Cognition 10 (1):140-145.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This article was written as a commentary on a target article by Peter W. Ross entitled "The Location Problem for Color Subjectivism" [Consciousness and Cognition 10(1), 42-58 (2001)], and is published together with it, and with other commentaries and Ross's reply. If you or your library have the necessary subscription you can get PDF versions of the target article, all the commentaries, and Ross's reply to the commentaries here. However, I do not think that it is by any means essential for you to have read Ross's piece in order to understand this one. Ross defends a view called "color physicalism" or color realism that holds (simplifying somewhat) that colors are real physical properties (in typical cases, spectral reflectances of object surfaces). This is in opposition to what is probably a more widely held "subjectivist" view of color, holding that color qualities really exist only in the mind. In my commentary I suggest that a realist view of qualitative properties, such as Ross's, together with a direct, active view of perception, and a concept of "extended mind" (Clark & Chalmers, 1998) may provide the materials for a real solution to the notorious hard problem of consciousness. I sketch this solution in outline. - N.J.T.T














 
Varela, F. (1995). Neurophenomenology: A methodological remedy for the hard problem. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (4):330-49.   (Cited by 248 | Annotation | Google)




  
Vasilyev, Vadim V. (2009). The Hard Problem of Consciousness and Two Arguments for Interactionism. Faith and Philosophy 26 (5):514-526.   (Google)
Abstract: The paper begins with a restatement of Chalmers's "hard problem of consciousness". It is suggested that an interactionist approach is one of the possible solutions of this problem. Some fresh arguments against the identity theory and epiphenomenalism as main rivals of interactionism are developed. One of these arguments has among its colloraries a denial of local supervenience, although not of the causal closure principle. As a result of these considerations a version of "local interactionism" (compatible with causal closure) is proposed.
 
Velmans, Prof Max (2007). How to separate conceptual issues from empirical ones in the study of consciousness. In Rahul Banerjee & Bikas Chakrabarti (eds.), [Book Chapter] (in Press). Elsevier.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Modern consciousness studies are in a healthy state, with many progressive empirical programmes in cognitive science, neuroscience and related sciences, using relatively conventional third-person research methods. However not all the problems of consciousness can be resolved in this way. These problems may be grouped into problems that require empirical advance, those that require theoretical advance, and those that require a re-examination of some of our pre-theoretical assumptions. I give examples of these, and focus on two problems—what consciousness is, and what consciousness does—that require all three. In this, careful attention to conscious phenomenology and finding an appropriate way to relate first-person evidence to third-person evidence appears to be central to progress. But we may also need to re-examine what we take to be “natural facts” about the world, and how we can know them. The same appears to be true for a trans-cultural understanding of consciousness that combines classical Indian phenomenological methods with the third-person methods of Western science





 
Velmans, Max (1995). The relation of consciousness to the material world. [Journal (Paginated)] 2 (3):255-65.   (Cited by 28 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: Many of the arguments about how to address the hard versus the easy questions of consciousness put by Chalmers (1995) are similar to ones I have developed in Velmans (1991a,b; 1993a). This includes the multiplicity of mind/body problems, the limits of functional explanation, the need for a nonreductionist approach, and the notion that consciousness may be related to neural/physical representation via a dual-aspect theory of information. But there are also differences. Unlike Chalmers I argue for the use of neutral information processing language for functional accounts rather than the term "awareness." I do not agree that functional equivalence cannot be extricated from phenomenal equivalence, and suggest a hypothetical experiment for doing so - using a cortical implant for blindsight. I argue that not all information has phenomenal accompaniments, and introduce a different form of dual-aspect theory involving "psychological complementarity." I also suggest that the hard problem posed by "qualia" has its origin in a misdescription of everyday experience implicit in dualism











 
Vranas, Peter B. M. (2008). Review of Owen Flanagan, The Really Hard Problem: Meaning in a Material World. Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews 2008 (9).   (Google) 
 
Warner, Richard (1996). Facing ourselves: Incorrigibility and the mind-body problem. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (3):217-30.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 




 
Wilber, Ken (online). The hard problem and integral psychology.   (Google)
Abstract: Although far from unanimous, there seems to be a general consensus that neither mind nor brain can be reduced without remainder to the other. This essay argues that indeed both mind and brain need to be included in a nonreductionistic way in any genuinely integral theory of consciousness. In order to facilitate such integration, this essay presents the results of an extensive cross-cultural literature search on the "mind" side of the equation, suggesting that the mental phenomena that need to be considered in any integral theory include developmental levels or waves of consciousness, developmental lines or streams of consciousness, states of consciousness, and the self (or self-system). A "master template" of these various phenomena, culled from over one-hundred psychological systems East and West, is presented. It is suggested that this master template represents a general summary of the "mind" side of the brain-mind integration. The essay concludes with reflections on the "hard problem," or how the mind-side can be integrated with the brain-side to generate a more integral theory of consciousness
 
Wright, Wayne (2007). Explanation and the hard problem. Philosophical Studies 132 (2):301-330.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper argues that the form of explanation at issue in the hard problem of consciousness is scientifically irrelevant, despite appearances to the contrary. In particular, it is argued that the











 
Zahavi, Dan (2003). Intentionality and phenomenality: A phenomenological take on the hard problem. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 29:63-92.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
1.2e Cognitive Closure




Allen, Sophie R. (online). A space oddity: McGinn on consciousness and space.   (Google | More links) 




 
Brueckner, Anthony L. & Beroukhim, E. (2003). McGinn on consciousness and the mind-body problem. In Quentin Smith & Aleksandar Jokic (eds.), Consciousness: New Philosophical Perspectives. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Dauer, Francis W. (2001). McGinn's materialism and epiphenomenalism. Analysis 61 (2):136-139.   (Google | More links) 






 
Davies, W. M. (1999). Sir William Mitchell and the "new mysterianism". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 77 (3):253-73.   (Google | More links) 








 
de Leon, David (1995). The limits of thought and the mind-body problem. Lund University Cognitive Studies 42.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper gives an account of Colin McGinn's essay: "Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem?". McGinn's answer to his own essay title is that the problem is forever beyond us due to the particular nature of our cognitive abilities.The present author offers a number of criticisms of the arguments which support this conclusion








 
Dietrich, Eric & Hardcastle, Valerie Gray (2004). Sisyphus's Boulder: Consciousness and the Limits of the Knowable. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In Sisyphus's Boulder, Eric Dietrich and Valerie Hardcastle argue that we will never get such a theory because consciousness has an essential property that...







 
Garcia, Robert K. (2000). Minds sans miracles: Colin McGinn's naturalized mysterianism. Philosophia Christi 2 (2):227-242.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Garvey, J. C. (1997). What does McGinn think we cannot know? Analysis 57 (3):196-201.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Hanson, Philip P. (1993). McGinn's cognitive closure. Dialogue 32 (3):579-85.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Jäger, Christoph (online). Skepticism, information, and closure.   (Google) 
 
Kirk, Robert E. (1991). Why shouldn't we be able to solve the mind-body problem? Analysis 51 (January):17-23.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google)




  
Kraemer, Eric Russert (2006). Moral mysterianism. Southwest Philosophy Review 22 (1):69-77.   (Google) 
 
Krellenstein, Marc F. (1995). Unsolvable problems, visual imagery, and explanatory satisfaction. Journal of Mind and Behavior 16 (3):235-54.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: It has been suggested that certain problems may be unsolvable because of the mind's cognitive structure, but we may wonder what problems, and exactly why. The ultimate origin of the universe and the mind-body problem seem to be two such problems. As to why, Colin McGinn has argued that the mind-body problem is unsolvable because any theoretical concepts about the brain will be observation-based and unable to connect to unobservable subjective experience. McGinn's argument suggests a requirement of imagability -- an observation basis -- for physical causal explanation that cannot be met for either of these problems. Acausal descriptions may be possible but not the causal analyses that provide the greatest explanatory satisfaction, a psychological phenomenon that seems tied to the strength of the underlying observation basis but is affected by other factors as well









 
Kriegel, Uriah (2004). The new mysterianism and the thesis of cognitive closure. Acta Analytica 18 (30-31):177-191.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The paper discusses Colin McGinn’s mysterianist approach to the phenomenon of consciousness. According to McGinn, consciousness is, in and of itself, a fully natural phenomenon, but we humans are just cognitively closed to it, meaning that we cannot in principle understand its nature. I argue that, on a proper conception of the relation between an intellectual problem and its solution, we may well not know what the solution is to a problem we understand, or we may not understand exactly what the problem is, but it is incoherent to suppose that we cannot understand what would count as a solution to a problem we can and do understand. The argument appeals to certain accepted assumption in the logic of questions, developed in the early sixties, mainly by Stahl. I close with a general characterization of mysterianism as such, and formulate a form of mysterianism which is in some sense more optimistic and in another more pessimistic than McGinn’s






 
Kukla, Andr (1995). Mystery, mind, and materialism. Philosophical Psychology 8 (3):255-64.   (Google)
Abstract: McGinn claims that (1) there is nothing “inherently mysterious” about consciousness, even though (2) we will never be able to understand it. The first claim is no more than a rhetorical flourish. The second may be read either as a claim (1) that we are unable to construct an explanatory theory of consciousness, or (2) that any such theory must strike us as unintelligible, in the sense in which quantum mechanics is sometimes said to be unintelligible. On the first reading, McGinn's argument is based on a false premiss (the “homogeneity constraint"). On the second reading, it suffers from the shortcoming that the central notion of intelligibility is too obscure to permit any definite conclusion. I close with a brief discussion of the contemporary tendency to reject non-physicalist approaches to consciousness on a priori grounds
 
McDonough, Richard M. (1992). The last stand of mechanism. Journal of Speculative Philosophy 6 (3):206-25.   (Google) 
 
McGinn, Colin (1995). Consciousness and space. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Imprint Academic.   (Cited by 28 | Google) 
 
McGinn, Colin (1991). Consciousness and the natural order. In The Problem of Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Annotation | Google)




  
McGinn, Colin (1989). Can we solve the mind-body problem? Mind 98 (July):349-66.   (Cited by 138 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
McGinn, Colin (1993). Problems in Philosophy. Blackwell.   (Cited by 47 | Google | More links) 




 
McGinn, Colin (1991). The hidden structure of consciousness. In The Problem of Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google)




  
McGinn, Colin (1999). The Mysterious Flame: Conscious Minds in a Material World. Basic Books.   (Cited by 61 | Google | More links) 








 
McGinn, Colin (1991). The Problem of Consciousness: Essays Toward a Resolution. Blackwell.   (Cited by 185 | Annotation | Google)




  
McGinn, Colin (2003). What constitutes the mind-body problem. Philosophical Issues 13 (1):148-62.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 






 
Megill, Jason L. (2005). Locke's mysterianism: On the unsolvability of the mind-body problem. Locke Studies 5:119-147.   (Google) 
 
Murphy, Peter (2006). A strategy for assessing closure (epistemic closure principle). Erkenntnis 65 (3):365-383.   (Google) 
 
P,  (2005). Mysteries and scandals: Transcendental naturalism and the future of philosophy. Critica 37 (110):35-52.   (Google) 
 
Rowlands, Mark (2007). Mysterianism. In Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Sacks, Mark (1994). Cognitive closure and the limits of understanding. Ratio 7 (1):26-42.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Taliaferro, Charles (1999). Mysterious flames in philosophy of mind. Philosophia Christi 1 (2):21-31.   (Google) 
 
Whitely, C. H. (1990). McGinn on the mind-body problem. Mind 99 (394):289.   (Google | More links) 




 
Worley, Sara (2000). What is property p, anyway? Analysis 60 (1):58-62.   (Google | More links) 






 
1.2f Conceptual Analysis and A Priori Entailment




Balog, Katalin (2001). Commentary on Frank Jackson's from metaphysics to ethics. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 62 (3):645–652.   (Google)
Abstract: Discussion of Frank Jackson’s a priori entailment thesis – which he employs to connect metaphysics and conceptual analysis. In From Metaphysics to Ethics. (2001) he develops this thesis within the two-dimensional framework and also proposes a formal argument for the existence of a priori truths. I argue that the two-dimensional framework doesn’t provide independent support for the a priori entailment thesis since one has to build into the framework assumptions as strong as the thesis itself. 
 
Beaton, Michael (2009). Qualia and Introspection. Journal of Consciousness Studies 16 (5):88-110.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The claim that behaviourally undetectable inverted spectra are possible has been endorsed by many physicalists. I explain why this starting point rules out standard forms of scientific explanation for qualia. The modern ‘phenomenal concept strategy’ is an updated way of defending problematic intuitions like these, but I show that it cannot help to recover standard scientific explanation. I argue that Chalmers is right: we should accept the falsity of physicalism if we accept this problematic starting point. I further argue that accepting this starting point amounts to at least implicitly endorsing certain theoretical claims about the nature of introspection. I therefore suggest that we allow ourselves to be guided, in our quest to understand qualia, by whatever independently plausible theories of introspection we have. I propose that we adopt a more moderate definition of qualia, as those introspectible properties which cannot be fully specified simply by specifying the non-controversially introspectible ‘propositional attitude’ mental states (including seeing x, experiencing x, and so on, where x is a specification of a potentially public state of affairs). Qualia thus defined may well fit plausible, naturalisable accounts of introspection. If so, such accounts have the potential to explain, rather than explain away, the problematic intuitions discussed earlier; an approach that should allow integration of our understanding of qualia with the rest of science.





 
Blackburn, Simon (2000). Critical notice of Frank Jackson, from metaphysics to ethics: A defence of conceptual analysis. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 78 (1):119 – 124.   (Google | More links) 




 
Block, Ned & Stalnaker, Robert (1999). Conceptual analysis, dualism, and the explanatory gap. Philosophical Review 108 (1):1-46.   (Cited by 119 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The explanatory gap . Consciousness is a mystery. No one has ever given an account, even a highly speculative, hypothetical, and incomplete account of how a physical thing could have phenomenal states. (Nagel, 1974, Levine, 1983) Suppose that consciousness is identical to a property of the brain, say activity in the pyramidal cells of layer 5 of the cortex involving reverberatory circuits from cortical layer 6 to the thalamus and back to layers 4 and 6,as Crick and Koch have suggested for visual consciousness. (See Crick (1994).) Still, that identity itself calls out for explanation! Proponents of an explanatory gap disagree about whether the gap is permanent. Some (e.g. Nagel, 1974) say that we are like the scientifically naive person who is told that matter = energy, but does not have the concepts required to make sense of the idea. If we can acquire these concepts, the gap is closable. Others say the gap is uncloseable because of our cognitive limitations. (McGinn, 1991) Still others say that the gap is a consequence of the fundamental nature of consciousness







 
Bloomfield, Paul (2005). Let's be realistic about serious metaphysics. Synthese 144 (1):69-90.   (Google) 
 
Brown, Richard (2010). Deprioritizing the A Priori Arguments against Physicalism. Journal of Consciousness Studies 17 (4-5).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper I argue that a priori arguments fail to present any real problem for physicalism. They beg the question against physicalism in the sense that the argument will only seem compelling if one is already assuming that qualitative properties are nonphysical. To show this I will present the reverse-zombie and reverse-knowledge arguments. The only evidence against physicalism is a priori arguments, but there are also a priori arguments against dualism of exactly the same variety. Each of these parity arguments has premises that are just as intuitively plausible, and it cannot be the case that both the traditional scenarios and the reverse-scenarios are all ideally conceivable. Given this one set must be merely prima facie conceivable and only empirical methods will tell us which is which. So, by the time a priori methodology will be of any use it will be too late. 






 
Byrne, Alex (1999). Cosmic hermeneutics. Philosophical Perspectives 13:347--84.   (Cited by 18 | Google | More links) 








 
Carruthers, Peter (2004). Reductive explanation and the "explanatory gap". Canadian Journal of Philosophy 34 (2):153-174.   (Cited by 10 | Google)
Abstract: Can phenomenal consciousness be given a reductive natural explanation? Exponents of an
 
Chalmers, David J. & Jackson, Frank (2001). Conceptual analysis and reductive explanation. Philosophical Review 110 (3):315-61.   (Cited by 86 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Is conceptual analysis required for reductive explanation? If there is no a priori entailment from microphysical truths to phenomenal truths, does reductive explanation of the phenomenal fail? We say yes (Chalmers 1996; Jackson 1994, 1998). Ned Block and Robert Stalnaker say no (Block and Stalnaker 1999)











 
Crane, Tim (online). Cosmic hermeneutics vs emergence: The challenge of the explanatory gap.   (Google)
Abstract: This paper is a defence of Terence Horgan’s claim that any genuinely physicalist position must distinguish itself from (what has been traditionally known as) emergentism. I argue that physicalism is necessarily reductive in character -- it must either give a reductive account of apparently non-physical entities, or a reductive explanation of why there are non-physical entities. I argue that many recent ‘nonreductive’ physicalists do not do this, and that because of this they cannot adequately distinguish their view from emergentism. The conclusion is that this is the real challenge posed by Joseph Levine’s ‘explanatory gap’ argument: if physicalists cannot close the explanatory gap in Levine’s preferred way, they must find some other way to do it. Otherwise their view is indistinguishable from emergentism
 
Dowell, Janice (2008). A priori entailment and conceptual analysis: Making room for type-c physicalism. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 86 (1):93 – 111.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: One strategy for blocking Chalmers's overall case against physicalism has been to deny his claim that showing that phenomenal properties are in some sense physical requires an a priori entailment of the phenomenal truths from the physical ones. Here I avoid this well-trodden ground and argue instead that an a priori entailment of the phenomenal truths from the physical ones does not require an analysis in the Jackson/Chalmers sense. This is to sever the dualist's link between conceptual analysis and a priori entailment by showing that the lack of the former does not imply the absence of the latter. Moreover, given the role of the argument from conceptual analysis in Chalmers's overall case for dualism, undermining that argument effectively undermines that case as a whole in a way that, I'll argue, undermining the conceivability arguments as stand-alone arguments does not





 
Dowell, J. L. (2008). A priori entailment and conceptual analysis: Making room for type-c physicalism. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 86 (1):93 – 111.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: One strategy for blocking Chalmers's overall case against physicalism has been to deny his claim that showing that phenomenal properties are in some sense physical requires an a priori entailment of the phenomenal truths from the physical ones. Here I avoid this well-trodden ground and argue instead that an a priori entailment of the phenomenal truths from the physical ones does not require an analysis in the Jackson/Chalmers sense. This is to sever the dualist's link between conceptual analysis and a priori entailment by showing that the lack of the former does not imply the absence of the latter. Moreover, given the role of the argument from conceptual analysis in Chalmers's overall case for dualism, undermining that argument effectively undermines that case as a whole in a way that, I'll argue, undermining the conceivability arguments as stand-alone arguments does not





 
Dowell, Janice (ms). Serious metaphysics and the vindication of explanatory reductions.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Gertler, Brie (2002). Explanatory reduction, conceptual analysis, and conceivability arguments about the mind. Noûs 36 (1):22-49.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The current stand-off between reductionists and anti-reductionists about the mental has sparked a long-overdue reexamination of key issues in philosophi- cal methodology.1 The resulting debate promises to advance our understand- ing of how empirical discoveries bear on the numerous philosophical problems which involve the analysis or reduction of kinds. The parties to this debate disagree about how, and to what extent, conceptual facts contribute to justify- ing explanatory reductions







 
Hornsby, Jennifer (2009). Physicalism, conceptual analysis, and acts of faith. In Ian Ravenscroft (ed.), Minds, Ethics, and Conditionals: Themes from the Philosophy of Frank Jackson. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Jackson, Frank (2007). A priori physicalism. In Brian P. McLaughlin & Jonathan D. Cohen (eds.), Contemporary Debates in Philosophy of Mind. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Jackson, Frank (2003). From H2O to water: The relevance to A Priori passage. In Hallvard Lillehammer & Gonzalo Rodriguez-Pereyra (eds.), Real Metaphysics. Routledge.   (Google) 
 
Jackson, Frank (1998). From Metaphysics to Ethics. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 508 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Frank Jackson champions the cause of conceptual analysis as central to philosophical inquiry. In recent years conceptual analysis has been undervalued and widely misunderstood, suggests Jackson. He argues that such analysis is mistakenly clouded in mystery, preventing a whole range of important questions from being productively addressed. He anchors his argument in discussions of specific philosophical issues, starting with the metaphysical doctrine of physicalism and moving on, via free will, meaning, personal identity, motion, and change, to ethics and the philosophy of color. In this way the book not only offers a methodological program for philosophy, but also casts new light on some much-debated problems and their interrelations



































 
Jackson, Frank (1994). Finding the Mind in the Natural World. In Roberto Casati, B. Smith & Stephen L. White (eds.), Philosophy and the Cognitive Sciences. Holder-Pichler-Tempsky.   (Cited by 27 | Annotation | Google)




  
Jackson, Frank (2006). On ensuring that physicalism is not a dual attribute theory in sheep's clothing. Philsophical Studies 131 (1):227-249.   (Google)
Abstract: Physicalists are committed to the determination without remainder of the psychological by the physical, but are they committed to this determination being a priori? This paper distinguishes this question understood de dicto from this question understood de re, argues that understood de re the answer is yes in a way that leaves open the answer to the question understood de dicto
 
Jackson, Frank (2001). Responses. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 62 (3):653-664.   (Google | More links) 




 
Jackson, Frank (2005). The Case for a Priori Physicalism. In Christian Nimtz & Ansgar Beckermann (eds.), Philosophy-Science -Scientific Philosophy, Main Lectures and Colloquia of GAP 5, Fifth International Congress of the Society for Analytical Philosophy. Mentis.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Kirk, Robert E. (2006). Physicalism and strict implication. Synthese 151 (3):523-536.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Suppose P is the conjunction of all truths statable in the austere vocabulary of an ideal physics. Then phsicalists are likely to accept that any truths not included in P are different ways of talking about the reality specified by P. This ‘redescription thesis’ can be made clearer by means of the ‘strict implication thesis’, according to which inconsistency or incoherence are involved in denying the implication from P to interesting truths not included in it, such as truths about phenomenal consciousness. Commitment to the strict implication thesis cannot be escaped by appeal to a posteriori necessary identities or entailments. A minimal physicalism formulated in terms of strict implication is preferable to one based on a priori entailment





 
Kriegel, Uriah (forthcoming). Self-Representationalism and the Explanatory Gap. In J. Liu & J. Perry (eds.), Consciousness and the Self: New Essays. Cambridge University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: According to the self-representational theory of consciousness – self- representationalism for short – a mental state is phenomenally conscious when, and only when, it represents itself in the right way. In this paper, I consider how self- representationalism might address the alleged explanatory gap between phenomenal consciousness and physical properties. I open with a presentation of self- representationalism and the case for it (§1). I then present what I take to be the most promising self-representational approach to the explanatory gap (§2). That approach is threatened, however, by an objection to self-representationalism, due to Levine, which I call the just more representation objection (§3). I close with a discussion of how the self-representationalist might approach the objection (§4).
 
Levin, Janet (2002). Is conceptual analysis needed for the reduction of qualitative states? Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 64 (3):571-591.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 





 
Lycan, William G. (2009). Serious metaphysics: Frank Jackson's defense of conceptual analysis. In Ian Ravenscroft (ed.), Minds, Ethics, and Conditionals: Themes from the Philosophy of Frank Jackson. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Marras, Ausonio (2005). Consciousness and reduction. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 56 (2):335-361.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: among them Joseph Levine, David Chalmers, Frank Jackson and Jaegwon Kim?have claimed that there are conceptual grounds sufficient for ruling out the possibility of a reductive explanation of phenomenal consciousness. Their claim assumes a functional model of reduction (regarded by Kim as an alternative to the traditional Nagelian model) which requires an a priori entailment from the facts in the reduction base to the phenomena to be explained. The aim of this paper is to show that this is an unreasonable requirement?a requirement that no reductive explanation in science should be expected to satisfy. I argue that the functional model is not substantively different from the Nagelian model properly understood, and that the question whether consciousness is reductively explainable?in a sense involving property identifications or in some weaker sense compatible with Nagelian reduction?is a fundamentally empirical question, not one that can be settled on conceptual grounds alone. Introduction Kim's critique of the Nagelian model of reduction The functional model of reduction Is consciousness reducible? Psychophysical reduction: concluding remarks







 
McLaughlin, Brian P. (2007). On the limits of A Priori physicalism. In Brian P. McLaughlin & Jonathan D. Cohen (eds.), Contemporary Debates in Philosophy of Mind. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Polger, Thomas W. (2008). H2O, 'water', and transparent reduction. Erkenntnis 69 (1).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Do facts about water have a priori, transparent, reductive explanations in terms of microphysics? Ned Block and Robert Stalnaker hold that they do not. David Chalmers and Frank Jackson hold that they do. In this paper I argue that Chalmers





 
Schroeter, Laura (2006). Against A Priori reductions. Philosophical Quarterly 56 (225):562-586.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: From Plato down to the logical empiricists, philosophers assumed that all empirical knowledge must rest on apriori semantic foundations. According to this philosophical tradition, empirical knowledge is possible only if the subject has an implicit apriori understanding of what it is her words and concepts refer to. You can






 
Witmer, D. Gene (2001). Conceptual analysis, circularity, and the commitments of physicalism. Acta Analytica 16 (26):119-133.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Witmer, D. Gene (2006). How to be a (sort of) A Priori physicalist. Philosophical Studies 131 (1):185-225.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: What has come to be known as “a priori physicalism” is the thesis, roughly, that the non-physical truths in the actual world can be deduced a priori from a complete physical description of the actual world. To many contemporary philosophers, a priori physicalism seems extremely implausible. In this paper I distinguish two kinds of a priori physicalism. One sort – strict a priori physicalism – I reject as both unmotivated and implausible. The other sort – liberal a priori physicalism – I argue is both motivated and plausible. This variety of a priori physicalism insists that the necessitation of non-physical truths by the physical facts must be underwritten in a certain fashion by a priori knowledge, but the a priori knowledge need not amount to a simple deduction of the non-physical truths from a complete physical description of the world. Further, this sort of liberal a priori physicalism has the advantage that it offers hope for a genuinely satisfying account of how the physical facts manage to necessitate the facts about phenomenal consciousness – thereby in effect solving the “hard problem” of consciousness. The first half of the paper sets out the motivation for liberal a priori physicalism and its superiority to the strict version; the second half presents one strategy available to the liberal a priori physicalist for showing how consciousness can be accommodated in a purely physical world






 
1.2g Explaining Consciousness, Misc




Tson, M. E. (ms). A Brief Explanation of Consciousness.   (Google)
Abstract: This short paper (4 pages) demonstrates how subjective experience, language, and consciousness can be explained in terms of abilities we share with the simplest of creatures, specifically the ability to detect, react to, and associate various aspects of the world.
 
Brook, Andrew (2005). Making consciousness safe for neuroscience. In Andrew Brook & Kathleen Akins (eds.), Cognition and the Brain: The Philosophy and Neuroscience Movement. Cambridge University Press.   (Google | More links) 





 
Cheruvalath, Reena & Baiju,  (2001). Can consciousness be explained? Journal of Indian Council of Philosophical Research 18 (3):222-226.   (Google) 
 
Churchland, Paul M. (1996). The rediscovery of light. Journal of Philosophy 93 (5):211-28.   (Cited by 17 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Churchland, Patricia S. (1998). What Should We Expect From a Theory of Consciousness? In H. Jasper, L. Descarries, V. Castellucci & S. Rossignol (eds.), Consciousness: At the Frontiers of Neuroscience. Lippincott-Raven.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Within the domain of philosophy, it is not unusual to hear the claim that most questions about the nature of consciousness are essentially and absolutely beyond the scope of science, no matter how science may develop in the twenty-first century. Some things, it is pointed out, we shall never _ever_ understand, and consciousness is one of them (Vendler 1994, Swinburne 1994, McGinn 1989, Nagel 1994, Warner 1994). One line of reasoning assumes that consciousness is the manifestation of a distinctly nonphysical thing, and hence has no physical properties that might be explored by techniques suitable to physical things. Dualism, as this view is known, is still to be found among those within the tradition of Kant and Hegel, as well as among some with religious convictions. Surprisingly, however, strenuous foot-dragging is evident even among philosophers of a materialist conviction. Indeed, one might say that it is the philosophical fashion of the 90's to pronounce consciousness unexplainable, and to find the explanatory aspirations of neurobiology to be faintly comic if not rather pitiful. The very word, "reductionism" has come to be used more or less synonymously with "benighted-scientism-run-amok", where scientistm apparently means "applying scientific techniques to domains where they are inapplicable." McGinn, perhaps the most unblushing of the naysayers, insists that we cannot expect even to make any headway on the problem. (p. 114) Ironically perhaps, here we are at a conference in honor of Dr. Herbert Jasper who was a great pioneer in moving neuroscience forward on this problem, and where results will be presented allegedly _showing_ additional progress on the problem. Because I am quite optimistic about future scientific progress on the nature of consciousness, my aim here, as a philosopher, is to address the most popular and influential of the skeptical arguments, and to explain why I find them unconvincing. Thus the overall form of the paper is negative, in the sense that I want to show why a set of naysaying arguments fail..





 
Clark, Austen (online). How to respond to philosophers on raw feels.   (Google)
Abstract: I address this talk to anyone who believes in the possibility of an informative empirical science about sensory qualities. Potentially this is a large audience. By "sensory quality" I mean those qualities manifest in various sensory experiences: color, taste, smell, touch, pain, and so on. We should include sensory modalities humans do not share, such as electro-reception in fish, echolocation in bats, or the skylight compass in birds. Those pursuing empirical science about this large domain might pursue it in the halls of experimental psychology, psycho-physics, psychometrics, psycho-physiology, sensory physiology, neuroscience, neuro-biology, comparative psychology, neuro-anatomy, and so on and on. These days even molecular genetics has kicked in with some notable recent contributions to the sequencing of genes for photopigments and for olfactory receptors. But to all those investigators in all those halls I bring bad news. Your discipline is _a priori_ impossible. Philosophers whom you do not know have uncovered _a priori_ proofs that empirical investigation which proceeds along the lines currently underway, or which will proceed along lines that are currently _imaginable_, does not, will not, and cannot explain the sensory qualities of experience. Or at least so they say. You might as well give up now
 
Copenhaver, Rebecca (2006). Is Thomas Reid a mysterian? Journal of the History of Philosophy 44 (3).   (Google)
Abstract: : Some critics find that Thomas Reid thinks the mind especially problematic, "hid in impenetrable darkness". I disagree. Reid does not hold that mind, more than body, resists explanation by the new science. The physical sciences have made great progress because they were transformed by the Newtonian revolution, and the key transformation was to stop looking for causes. Reid's harsh words are a call for methodological reform, consonant with his lifelong pursuit of a science of mind and also with his frequent (though overlooked) optimism about such a science
 
Cottrell, Allin (1995). Tertium datur? Reflections on Owen Flanagan's consciousness reconsidered. Philosophical Psychology 8 (1):85-103.   (Google)
Abstract: Owen Flanagan's arguments concerning qualia constitute an intermediate position between Dennett's “disqualification” of qualia and the thesis that qualia represent an insurmountable obstacle to constructive naturalism. This middle ground is potentially attractive, but it is shown to have serious problems. This is brought out via consideration of several classic areas of dispute connected with qualia, including the inverted spectrum, Frank Jackson's thought experiment, Hindsight, and epiphenomenalism. An attempt is made to formulate the basis for a less vulnerable variant on the “middle ground”
 
DeLancey, Craig (2007). Phenomenal experience and the measure of information. Erkenntnis 66 (3).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper defends the hypothesis that phenomenal experiences may be very complex information states. This can explain some of our most perplexing anti-physicalist intuitions about phenomenal experience. The approach is to describe some basic facts about information in such a way as to make clear the essential oversight involved, by way illustrating how various intuitive arguments against physicalism (such as Frank Jackson






 
de Weg, Henk bij (ms). Explaining consciousness and the duality of method.   (Google)
Abstract: In consciousness studies, the first-person perspective, seen as a way to approach consciousness, is often seen as nothing but a variant of the third-person perspective. One of the most important advocates of this view is Dennett. However, as I show in critical interaction with Dennett’s view, the first-person perspective and the third-person perspective are different ways of asking questions about themes. What these questions are is determined by the purposes that we have when we ask them. Since our purposes are different according to the perspective we take, each perspective has a set of leading questions of its own. This makes that the first-person perspective is an approach of consciousness that is substantially different from the third-person perspective, and that one cannot be reduced to the other. These perspectives are independent, although complementary approaches of the mind.
 
Elpidorou, Andreas (2010). Alva noë: Out of our heads: Why you are not your brain, and other lessons from the biology of consciousness. Minds and Machines 20 (1).   (Google) 
 
Fingelkurts, Andrew A.; Fingelkurts, Alexander A. & Neves, Carlos F. H. (2010). Natural World Physical, Brain Operational, and Mind Phenomenal Space-Time. Physics of Life Reviews 7 (2):195-249.   (Google)
Abstract: Concepts of space and time are widely developed in physics. However, there is a considerable lack of biologically plausible theoretical frameworks that can demonstrate how space and time dimensions are implemented in the activity of the most complex life-system – the brain with a mind. Brain activity is organized both temporally and spatially, thus representing space-time in the brain. Critical analysis of recent research on the space-time organization of the brain’s activity pointed to the existence of so-called operational space-time in the brain. This space-time is limited to the execution of brain operations of differing complexity. During each such brain operation a particular short-term spatio-temporal pattern of integrated activity of different brain areas emerges within related operational space-time. At the same time, to have a fully functional human brain one needs to have a subjective mental experience. Current research on the subjective mental experience offers detailed analysis of space-time organization of the mind. According to this research, subjective mental experience (subjective virtual world) has definitive spatial and temporal properties similar to many physical phenomena. Based on systematic review of the propositions and tenets of brain and mind space-time descriptions, our aim in this review essay is to explore the relations between the two. To be precise, we would like to discuss the hypothesis that via the brain operational space-time the mind subjective space-time is connected to otherwise distant physical space-time reality.
 
Hardcastle, Valerie Gray (1993). The naturalists versus the skeptics: The debate over a scientific understanding of consciousness. Journal of Mind and Behavior 14 (1):27-50.   (Cited by 7 | Annotation | Google)




  
Hardcastle, Valerie Gray (1996). The why of consciousness: A non-issue for materialists. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (1):7-13.   (Cited by 11 | Annotation | Google)




  
Hesslow, Germund (1996). Will neuroscience explain consciousness? Journal of Theoretical Biology 171 (7-8):29-39.   (Cited by 20 | Google) 
 
Horst, Steven (2005). Modeling, localization and the explanation of phenomenal properties: Philosophy and the cognitive sciences at the beginning of the millennium. Synthese 147 (3):477-513.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: Case studies in the psychophysics, modeling and localization of human vision are presented as an example of
 
Humphrey, Nicholas (2002). Thinking about feeling. In G. Richard (ed.), [Book Chapter]. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 








 
Janew, Claus (2009). Omnipresent Consciousness and Free Will. In How Consciousness Creates Reality. CreateSpace.   (Google)
Abstract: This article is not an attempt to explain consciousness in terms basically of quantum physics or neuro-biology. Instead I should like to place the term "Consciousness" on a broader footing. I shall therefore proceed from everyday reality, precisely where we experience ourselves as conscious beings. I shall use the term in such a general way as to resolve the question whether only a human being enjoys consciousness, or even a thermostat. Whilst the difference is considerable, it is not fundamental. Every effect exists in the perception of a consciousness. I elaborate on its freedom of choice, in my view the most important source of creativity, in a similarly general way. The problems associated with a really conscious decision do not disappear by mixing determination with a touch of coincidence. Both must enter into a higher unity. In so doing it will emerge that a certain degree of freedom of choice is just as omnipresent as consciousness - an inherent part of reality itself.






























 
O'Regan, J. Kevin; Myin, Erik & No,  (2005). Sensory consciousness explained (better) in terms of "corporality" and "alerting capacity". Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 4:369-385.   (Google)
Abstract: How could neural processes be associated with phenomenal consciousness? We present a way to answer this question by taking the counterintuitive stance that the sensory feel of an experience is not a thing that happens to us, but a thing we do: a skill we exercise. By additionally noting that sensory systems possess two important, objectively measurable properties, corporality and alerting capacity, we are able to explain why sensory experience possesses a sensory feel, but thinking and other mental processes do not. We are additionally able to explain why different sensory feels differ in the way they do
 
Kirk, Robert E. (1995). How is consciousness possible? In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Imprint Academic.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Kurthen, M. Moskopp (1995). On the prospects of a naturalistic theory of phenomenal consciousness. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Imprint Academic.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Lazarov, Georgi (online). Materialism and the problem of consciousness: The aesthesionomic approach.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 







 
Lockwood, Michael (1998). The Enigma of Sentience. In Stuart R. Hameroff, Alfred W. Kaszniak & A. C. Scott (eds.), Toward a Science of Consciousness II. MIT Press.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Maxwell, Nicholas (2000). The mind-body problem and explanatory dualism. Philosophy 75 (291):49-71.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Maxwell, Nicholas (2002). Three philosophical problems about consciousness. Ethical Record 107 (4):3-11.   (Google) 
 
Mills, Frederick B. (2001). A spinozist approach to the conceptual gap in consciousness studies. Journal Of Mind And Behavior 22 (1):91-101.   (Google) 
 
Montero, Barbara (2004). Consciousness is puzzling but not paradoxical. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 59 (1):213-226.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 






 
Moody, Todd C. (2003). Consciousness and complexity. Progress in Information, Complexity, and Design 2 (3).   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 










 
Moody, Todd (2007). Naturalism and the problem of consciousness. Pluralist 2 (1):72-83.   (Google) 
 
Morris, A. C. (1998). Commentary on ''cortical activity and the explanatory gap''. Consciousness and Cognition 7 (2):193-195.   (Google | More links) 





 
Musacchio, J. M. (2005). Why do qualia and the mind seem nonphysical? Synthese 147 (3):425-460.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In this article, I discuss several of the factors that jeopardize our understanding of the nature of qualitative experiences and the mind. I incorporate the view from neuroscience to clarify the na






 
Nida-Rumelin, Martine (1997). Is the naturalization of qualitative experience possible or sensible? In Martin Carrier & Peter K. Machamer (eds.), Mindscapes: Philosophy, Science, and the Mind. Pittsburgh University Press.   (Google) 
 
Nikolic, D. (1998). Commentary on ''cortical activity and the explanatory gap'' by John G. Taylor. Consciousness and Cognition 7 (2):196-201.   (Google | More links) 





 
Nixon, Gregory (2010). Hollows of Memory: From Individual Consciousness to Panexperientialism and Beyond. Journal of Consciousness Exploration and Research (3):213-401.   (Google)
Abstract: Preface/Introduction

The question under discussion is metaphysical and truly elemental. It emerges in two aspects – how did we come to be conscious of our own existence, and, as a deeper corollary, do existence and awareness necessitate each other? I am bold enough to explore these questions and I invite you to come along; I make no claim to have discovered absolute answers. However, I do believe I have created here a compelling interpretation. You’ll have to judge for yourself.



What follows is the presentation of three essays I have worked on over the past several years seeing publication for the first time. “Hollows of Experience” was written first as an invited chapter for a collection on the ontology of consciousness. However, when cuts became necessary, my chapter got the knife. Its length has prohibited it from publication in any print journal. “Myth and Mind” was written next as a journal article, but as my involvement with it grew so did its length, so it has also idled on my websty awaiting its call. “From Panexperiential-ism to Conscious Experience” was written most recently, but it is the only one to have been available to the public elsewhere than my own website. Under the name, “The Continuum of Experience”, it was Target Article #95 on the recently closed Karl Jaspers Forum (for discussion purposes only).



I have put them in a different sequence here, for reasons of logical sense. Up first, “Panexperientialism” deals with an idea difficult for many to accept, namely that conscious experience is a particular mode of symbolically reflected experience that is largely unique to our species. However, I aver that experienced sensation in itself (as found, for example, in autonomic sensory response systems) goes “all the way down” into nature, and thus the title, panexperientialism. 



Understanding this idea is helpful to dealing with the focus on language in Part I of “Hollows”, next, since here speech and general symbolic interaction in general are found to be the catalysts for the creation of our consciously experienced world (our “lived reality”). In Part II, however, I explore how experienced sensations must be coeval with existence, and, with even greater temerity, how all this sensational existence might have arisen within some literally inconceivable background of awareness-in-itself that yet has a dynamism that occasionally breaks into existence as experiential events and entities. (The latter may sound wacky, but physicists and cosmologists are themselves attempting to come to terms with that which seethes with vast potential energy in what they refer to as the quantum vacuum.)



“Myth and Mind” was put third since it deals with a major lacuna in “Hollows” – that presumed prehistoric period when members of our species made the painful crossing of the symbolic threshold into the beginnings of cultural consciousness. Speech plays a central role here, too, but I look more at narrative structures from the dawn of self-awareness when ritual and myth became vital to human survival. Why would fantastic stories and bizarre rituals be necessary? I speculate that growing foresight led to the unavoidable realization of certain mortality, from which, in turn, emerged the secondary realization that we were now alive. In contrast to our yet-to-come death, we have life here and now, and by ritually identifying with a symbolically expanded mythic, i.e., sacred, reality, we may continue to live on after bodily death, just as our ancestors and loved ones must also do. Language and mythmaking are necessary to avoid mortal despair and they remain at the core of human consciousness. 



As Ernst Cassirer (1944) has noted, language and myth are “twin creatures”, both metaphoric webs over a reality we can never wholly comprehend. We live in the symbolic and construct our works of imagination and wars of conquest to make life meaningful, to feel immortal, and to sense that we ourselves participate in a reality greater than ourselves. No doubt we do, but this does not mean our culturally constructed self-identities survive the death of our bodies, and it does not imply that our symbolic concepts can ever indicate the ultimate truth. We simply must symbolize an extended reality that was sacred to our ancestors: “Is it not our way, as illusory as it may be, to force continuance on our world and our life in the face of their inevitable ending? Are we not compelled to extend those imagi-nary horizons as far as we can despite the terror and the sometime joy their extension incites? Is their closure not a form of death?” (Crapanzano, p. 210)



Of course, this leaves me in the uncomfortable position of being forced to admit that this venture of mine must inevitably be another attempt at meaningful mythmaking. But what else could it be? This is certainly not a scientific proof though it is indeed an academically rigorous exploration. (Just try to count the citations!) I hope the reader will judge my thesis on the basis of its coherence, the sense of meaning it evokes, my intellectual responsibility, and, finally, the engagement it inspires. If you have read my expositions and found yourself immersed in the timeless questions I here call forth, I would call these writings successful (even if you violently disagree with my answers). 



I am very grateful to Huping Hu for granting me this special issue of JCER in which to present my ideas in some detail. He has patiently dealt with my exuberant approach and allowed the many changes I kept coming up with right until the final publication date. I also wish to thank the many potential commentators who politely replied to my invitation, and, even more, I thank those who made time to write actual commentaries.



References



Cassirer, E. (1944). An Essay on Man: An Introduction to a Philosophy of Hu-man Culture. New Haven/London: Yale UP.



Crapanzano, V. (2004). Imaginative Horizons: An Essay in Literary-Philosophical Anthropology. Chicago: U of Chicago Press.



Gregory M. Nixon

University of Northern British Columbia

Prince George, British Columbia, Canada

Email: doknyx@shaw.ca

Websty: http://members.shaw.ca/doknyx 















Contents



Preface/Introduction 213



From Panexperientialism to Conscious Experience:

The Continuum of Experience 216



Hollows of Experience 234



Myth and Mind:

The Origin of Human Consciousness in the Discovery of the Sacred 289


 
Nixon, Gregory (2010). Myth and Mind: The Origin of Consciousness in the Discovery of the Sacred. journal of Consciousness Exploration and Research (3):289-337.   (Google)
Abstract: By accepting that the formal structure of human language is the key to understanding the uniquity of human culture and consciousness and by further accepting the late appearance of such language amongst the Cro-Magnon, I am free to focus on the causes that led to such an unprecedented threshold crossing. In the complex of causes that led to human being, I look to scholarship in linguistics, mythology, anthropology, paleontology, and to creation myths themselves for an answer. I conclude that prehumans underwent an existential crisis, i.e., the realization of certain mortality, that could be borne only by the discovery-creation of the larger realm of symbolic consciousness once experienced as the sacred (but today we know it as "the world" – as opposed to our immediate natural environment and that of other animals). Thus, although we, the human species, are but one species among innumerable others, we differ in kind, not degree. This quality is our symbolically enabled self-consciousness, the fortress of cultural identity that empowers but also imprisons awareness.
 
O'Regan, J. Kevin; Myin, Erik & No,  (2005). Sensory consciousness explained (better) in terms of 'corporality' and 'alerting capacity'. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 4 (4):369-387.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links)
Abstract: How could neural processes be associated with phenomenal consciousness? We present a way to answer this question by taking the counterintuitive stance that the sensory feel of an experience is not a thing that happens to us, but a thing we do: a skill we exercise. By additionally noting that sensory systems possess two important, objectively measurable properties, corporality and alerting capacity, we are able to explain why sensory experience possesses a sensory feel, but thinking and other mental processes do not. We are additionally able to explain why different sensory feels differ in the way they do






 
Schilhab, T. S. S. (1998). Comments on ''cortical activity and the explanatory gap''. Consciousness and Cognition 7 (2):212-213.   (Google | More links) 





 
Mensch, James R. (2000). An objective phenomenology: Husserl sees colors. Journal of Philosophical Research 25 (January):231-60.   (Google)
Abstract: David Chalmers expresses a general consensus when he writes that
 
Smith, D. J. (1998). Commentary on ''cortical activity and the explanatory gap'' by J. G. Taylor. Consciousness and Cognition 7 (2):214-215.   (Google) 
 
Strawson, Galen (1999). Realistic Materialist Monism. In S. Hameroff, A. Kaszniak & D. Chalmers (eds.), Towards a Science of Consciousness III.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Short version of 'Real materialism', given at Tucson III Conference, 1998. (1) physicalism is true (2) the qualitative character of experience is real, as most naively understood ... so (3) the qualitative character of experience (considered specifically as such) is wholly physical. ‘How can consciousness possibly be physical, given what we know about the physical?’ To ask this question is already to have gone wrong. We have no good reason (as Priestley and Russell and others observe) to think that we know anything about the physical that gives us any reason to find any problem in the idea that consciousness is wholly physical.





 
Sytsma, Justin & Machery, Edouard (2009). How to study folk intuitions about phenomenal consciousness. Philosophical Psychology 22 (1):21 – 35.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The assumption that the concept of phenomenal consciousness is pretheoretical is often found in the philosophical debates on consciousness. Unfortunately, this assumption has not received the kind of empirical attention that it deserves. We suspect that this is in part due to difficulties that arise in attempting to test folk intuitions about consciousness. In this article we elucidate and defend a key methodological principle for this work. We draw this principle out by considering recent experimental work on the topic by Joshua Knobe and Jesse Prinz (2008). We charge that their studies do not establish that the folk have a concept of phenomenal consciousness in part because they compare group agents to individuals . The problem is that group agents and individuals differ in some significant ways in terms of functional organization and behavior. We propose that future experiments should establish that ordinary people are disposed to ascribe different mental states to entities that are given behaviorally and functionally equivalent descriptions





 
Taylor, John G. (1998). Cortical activity and the explanatory gap. Consciousness and Cognition 7 (2):109-48.   (Cited by 14 | Google | More links)
Abstract: An exploration is given of neural network features now being uncovered in cortical processing which begins to go a little way to help bridge the ''Explanatory Gap'' between phenomenal consciousness and correlated brain activity. A survey of properties suggested as being possessed by phenomenal consciousness leads to a set of criteria to be required of the correlated neural activity. Various neural styles of processing are reviewed and those fitting the criteria are selected for further analysis. One particular processing style, in which semiautonomous and long-lasting cortical activity ''bubbles'' are created by input, is selected as being the most appropriate. Further experimental criteria are used to help narrow the possible neural styles involved. This leads to a class of neural models underpinning phenomenal consciousness and to a related set of testable predictions







 
Tson, M. E. (ms). From Dust to Descartes: A Mechanical and Evolutionary Explanation of Consciousness and Self-Awareness.   (Google)
Abstract: Beginning with physical reactions as simple and mechanical as rust, From Dust to Descartes goes step by evolutionary step to explore how the most remarkable and personal aspects of consciousness have arisen, how our awareness of the world of ourselves differs from that of other species, and whether machines could ever become self-aware. Part I addresses a newborn’s innate abilities. Part II shows how with these and experience, we can form expectations about the world. Parts III concentrates on the essential role that others play in the formation of self-awareness. Part IV then explores what follows from this explanation of human consciousness, touching on topics such as free will, personality, intelligence, and color perception which are often associated with self-awareness and the philosophy of mind. 
 
van Gulick, Robert (1993). Understanding the phenomenal mind: Are we all just armadillos? In Martin Davies & Glyn W. Humphreys (eds.), Consciousness: Psychological and Philosophical Essays. Blackwell.   (Cited by 51 | Annotation | Google)




  
van Gulick, Robert (1995). What would count as explaining consciousness? In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Imprint Academic.   (Cited by 14 | Annotation | Google)




  
Vasilyev, Vadim V. (2006). Brain and consciousness: Exits from the labyrinth. Social Sciences 37 (2):51-66.   (Google) 
 
Velmans, Max (2007). The co-evolution of matter and consciousness. Velmans, Prof Max (2007) the Co-Evolution of Matter and Consciousness. [Journal (Paginated)] 44 (2):273-282.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Theories about the evolution of consciousness relate in an intimate way to theories about the distribution of consciousness, which range from the view that only human beings are conscious to the view that all matter is in some sense conscious. Broadly speaking, such theories can be classified into discontinuity theories and continuity theories. Discontinuity theories propose that consciousness emerged only when material forms reached a given stage of evolution, but propose different criteria for the stage at which this occurred. Continuity theories argue that in some primal form, consciousness always accompanies matter and as matter evolved in form and complexity consciousness co-evolved, for example into the forms that we now recognise in human beings. Given our limited knowledge of the necessary and sufficient conditions for the presence of human consciousness in human brains, all options remain open. On balance however continuity theory appears to be more elegant than discontinuity theory





 
Wright, Wayne (web). Why naturalize consciousness? Southern Journal of Philosophy 45 (4):583-607.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper examines the relevance of philosophical work on consciousness to its scientific study. Of particular concern is the debate over whether consciousness can be naturalized, which is typically taken to have consequences for the prospects for its scientific investigation. It is not at all clear that philosophers of consciousness have properly identified and evaluated the assumptions about scientific activity made by both naturalization and anti- naturalization projects. I argue that there is good reason to think that some of the assumptions about physicalism and explanation made by the parties to the debate are open to serious doubt. Thus this paper is an invitation for those inquiring into whether consciousness can be naturalized to more carefully consider the expected payoff of such efforts





 
1.3 Consciousness and Materialism 

600 / 613 entries displayed





Bates, Jared (2009). A defence of the explanatory argument for physicalism. Philosophical Quarterly 59 (235):315-324.   (Google)
Abstract: One argument for reductive physicalism, the explanatory argument, rests on its ability to explain the vast and growing body of acknowledged psychophysical correlations. Jaegwon Kim has recently levelled four objections against the explanatory argument. I assess all of Kim's objections, showing that none is successful. The result is a defence of the explanatory argument for physicalism
 
Batthyany, Alexander & Elitzur, Avshalom C. (eds.) (2009). Irreducibly Conscious. Selected Papers on Consciousness. Winter.   (Google) 
 
Rupert, Robert D. (2007). Review of J. T. Ismael, The Situated Self. Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews 2007 (10).   (Google) 
 
1.3a The Knowledge Argument




Alter, Torin (1998). A limited defense of the knowledge argument. Philosophical Studies 90 (1):35-56.   (Cited by 15 | Google | More links) 




 
Alter, Torin (2006). Does representationalism undermine the knowledge argument? In Torin Alter & Sven Walter (eds.), Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 5 | Google)
Abstract: The knowledge argument aims to refute physicalism, the view that the world is entirely physical. The argument first establishes the existence of facts (or truths or information) about consciousness that are not a priori deducible from the complete physical truth, and then infers the falsity of physicalism from this lack of deducibility. Frank Jackson (1982, 1986) gave the argument its classic formulation. But now he rejects the argument (Jackson 1998b, 2003, chapter 3 of this volume). On his view, it relies on a false conception of sensory experience, which should be replaced with representationalism (also known as intentionalism), the view that phenomenal states are just representational states. And he argues that mental representation is physically explicable
 
Alter, Torin (2001). Know-how, ability, and the ability hypothesis. Theoria 67 (3):229-39.   (Cited by 7 | Google)
Abstract: David Lewis (1983, 1988) and Laurence Nemirow (1980, 1990) claim that knowing what an experience is like is knowing-how, not knowing-that. They identify this know-how with the abilities to remember, imagine, and recognize experiences, and Lewis labels their view ‘the Ability Hypothesis’. The Ability Hypothesis has intrinsic interest. But Lewis and Nemirow devised it specifically to block certain anti-physicalist arguments due to Thomas Nagel (1974, 1986) and Frank Jackson (1982, 1986). Does it?
 
Alter, Torin (online). Knowledge argument against physicalism. Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.   (Google) 
 
Alter, Torin (1995). Mary's new perspective. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 73 (4):585-84.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 







 
Alter, Torin & Walter, Sven (eds.) (2007). Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links)
Abstract: What is the nature of consciousness? How is consciousness related to brain processes? This volume collects thirteen new papers on these topics: twelve by leading and respected philosophers and one by a leading color-vision scientist. All focus on consciousness in the "phenomenal" sense: on what it's like to have an experience. Consciousness has long been regarded as the biggest stumbling block for physicalism, the view that the mind is physical. The controversy has gained focus over the last few decades, and phenomenal knowledge and phenomenal concepts--knowledge of consciousness and the associated concepts--have come to play increasingly prominent roles in this debate. Consider Frank Jackson's famous case of Mary, the super-scientist who learns all the physical information while confined in a black-and-white room. According to Jackson, if physicalism is true, then Mary's physical knowledge should allow her to deduce what it's like to see in color. Yet it seems intuitively clear that she learns something when she leaves the room. But then how can consciousness be physical? Arguably, whether this sort of reasoning is sound depends on how phenomenal concepts and phenomenal knowledge are construed. For example, some argue that the Mary case reveals something about phenomenal concepts but has no implications for the nature of consciousness itself. Are responses along these lines adequate? Or does the problem arise again at the level of phenomenal concepts? The papers in this volume engage with the latest developments in this debate. The authors' perspectives range widely. For example, Daniel Dennett argues that anti-physicalist arguments such as the knowledge argument are simply confused; David Papineau grants that such arguments at least reveal important features of phenomenal concepts; and David Chalmers defends the anti-physicalist arguments, arguing that the "phenomenal concept strategy" cannot succeed






 
Alter, Torin (web). Phenomenal knowledge without experience. In E. Wright (ed.), The Case for Qualia. MIT Press.   (Google)
Abstract: Phenomenal knowledge usually comes from experience. But it 
need not. For example, one could know what it’s like to see red without 
seeing red—indeed, without having any color experiences. Daniel Dennett 
(2007) and Pete Mandik (forthcoming) argue that this and related 
considerations undermine the knowledge argument against physicalism. 
If they are right, then this is not only a problem for anti‐physicalists. Their 
argument threatens to undermine any version of phenomenal realism—
the view that there are phenomenal properties, or qualia, that are not 
conceptually reducible to physical or functional properties. I will argue 
that this threat is illusory. Explaining why will clarify what is and is not at issue in discussions of the knowledge argument and phenomenal realism. This will strengthen the case for physically and functionally irreducible qualia. 

 
Alter, Torin (online). The knowledge argument. A Field Guide to the Philosophy of Mind.   (Cited by 3 | Google)
Abstract: Frank Jackson first presented the Knowledge Argument (henceforth KA) in "Epiphenomenal Qualia" 1982). The KA is an argument against physicalism, the doctrine that (very roughly put) everything is physical. The general thrust of the KA is that physicalism errs by misconstruing or denying the existence of the subjective features of experience. Physicalists have given numerous responses, and the debate continues about whether the KA ultimately succeeds in refuting any or all forms of physicalism. Jackson himself has recently
 
Alter, Torin (2007). The knowledge argument. In Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Cited by 3 | Google)
Abstract: The knowledge argument aims to refute physicalism, the doctrine that the world is entirely physical. Physicalism (also known as materialism) is widely accepted in contemporary philosophy. But some doubt that phenomenal consciousness
 
Anderson, James T. (online). A simple refutation of the knowledge argument against physicalism.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: One of the most persuasive objections to the identity thesis






 
Aranyosi, István (2008). Review of Torin Alter and Sven Walter (eds.) Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge. Mind 117 (467):665-669.   (Google) 
 
Bachrach, Jay E. (1990). Qualia and theory reduction: A criticism of Paul Churchland. Iyyun 281.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Balog, Katalin (2008). Review of Torin Alter, Sven wAlter (eds.), Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews 2008 (5).   (Google)
Abstract: The book under review is a collection of thirteen essays on the nature phenomenal concepts and the ways in which phenomenal concepts figure in debates over physicalism. Phenomenal concepts are of special interest in a number of ways. First, they refer to phenomenal experiences, and the qualitative character of those experiences (aka “qualia”) whose metaphysical status is hotly debated. There are recent arguments, originating in Descartes’ famous conceivability argument, that purport to show that phenomenal experience is irreducibly non-physical. Second, phenomenal concepts are widely thought to be special and unique among concepts. Both the anti-physicalist arguments and physicalist replies to these arguments turn on views about the nature of phenomenal concepts. In this review I survey the many ways in which the essays in this volume are engaged (pro or con) with anti-physicalist arguments and the role phenomenal concepts play in these arguments.
 
Beaton, Michael (2005). What RoboDennett still doesn't know. Journal Of Consciousness Studies 12 (12):3-25.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The explicit aim of Daniel Dennett’s new paper ‘What RoboMary Knows’ is to show that Mary (the hypothetical colour-blind neuroscientist) will necessarily be able to come to know what it is like to see in colour, if she fully understands all the physical facts about colour vision. I believe we can establish that Dennett’s line of reasoning is flawed, but the flaw is not as simple as an equivocation on ‘knows’. Rather, it goes to the heart of functionalism and hinges on whether or not Dennett is correct to claim that there is ‘no fact of the matter’ about what subjective experience consists in.








 
Beisecker, David (2000). There's something about Mary: Phenomenal consciousness and its attributions. Southwest Philosophy Review 16 (2):143-152.   (Google) 
 
Berntsen, J. (2004). Why physicalists needn't bother with Perry's recent response to the knowledge argument. Southern Journal of Philosophy 42 (2):135-148.   (Google) 
 
Bigelow, John C. & Pargetter, Robert (1990). Acquaintance with qualia. Theoria 61 (3):129-147.   (Cited by 16 | Annotation | Google)




  
Bigelow, John C. & Pargetter, Robert (2006). Re-acquaintance with qualia. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 84 (3):353 – 378.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Frank Jackson argued, in an astronomically frequently cited paper on 'Epiphenomenal qualia'[Jackson 1982 that materialism must be mistaken. His argument is called the knowledge argument. Over the years since he published that paper, he gradually came to the conviction that the conclusion of the knowledge argument must be mistaken. Yet he long remained totally unconvinced by any of the very numerous published attempts to explain where his knowledge argument had gone astray. Eventually, Jackson did publish a diagnosis of the reasons why, he now thinks, his knowledge argument against materialism fails to prove the falsity of materialism [Jackson 2005. He argues that you can block the knowledge argument against materialism - but only if you tie yourself to a dubious doctrine called representationalism. We argue that the knowledge argument fails as a refutation of either representational or nonrepresentational materialism. It does, however, furnish both materialists and dualists with a successful argument for the existence of distinctively first-person modes of acquaintance with mental states. Jackson's argument does not refute materialism: but it does bring to the surface significant features of thought and experience, which many dualists have sensed, and most materialists have missed







 
Byrne, Alex (2006). Review of There's Something About Mary. Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews 21.   (Google) 
 
Byrne, Alex (2002). Something about Mary. Grazer Philosophische Studien 63 (1):27-52.   (Cited by 13 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Jackson's black-and-white Mary teaches us that the propositional content of perception cannot be fully expressed in language










 
Campbell, Neil (2003). An inconsistency in the knowledge argument. Erkenntnis 58 (2):261-266.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Cath, Yuri (2009). The ability hypothesis and the new knowledge-how. Noûs 43 (1):137-156.   (Google | More links) 




 
Chalmers, David J. (2004). Phenomenal concepts and the knowledge argument. In Peter Ludlow, Yujin Nagasawa & Daniel Stoljar (eds.), There's Something About Mary: Essays on Phenomenal Consciousness and Frank Jackson's Knowledge Argument. MIT Press.   (Cited by 16 | Google | More links)
Abstract: *[[This paper is largely based on material in other papers. The first three sections and the appendix are drawn with minor modifications from Chalmers 2002c (which explores issues about phenomenal concepts and beliefs in much more depth, mostly independently of questions about materialism). The main ideas of the last three sections are drawn from Chalmers 1996, 1999, and 2002a, although with considerable revision and elaboration. ]]





 
Churchland, Paul M. (1989). Knowing qualia: A reply to Jackson. In A Neurocomputational Perspective. MIT Press.   (Cited by 63 | Annotation | Google)




  
Churchland, Paul M. (1985). Reduction, qualia and the direct introspection of brain states. Journal of Philosophy 82 (January):8-28.   (Cited by 110 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Coleman, Sam (2009). Why the Ability Hypothesis is best forgotten. Journal of Consciousness Studies 16 (2-3):74-97.   (Google)
Abstract: According to the knowledge argument, physicalism fails because when physically omniscient Mary first sees red, her gain in phenomenal knowledge involves a gain in factual knowledge. Thus not all facts are physical facts. According to the ability hypothesis, the knowledge argument fails because Mary only acquires abilities to imagine, remember and recognise redness, and not new factual knowledge. I argue that reducing Mary’s new knowledge to abilities does not affect the issue of whether she also learns factually: I show that gaining specific new phenomenal knowledge is required for acquiring abilities of the relevant kind. Phenomenal knowledge being basic to abilities, and not vice versa, it is left an open question whether someone who acquires such abilities also learns something factual. The answer depends on whether the new phenomenal knowledge involved is factual. But this is the same question we wanted to settle when first considering the knowledge argument. The ability hypothesis, therefore, has offered us no dialectical progress with the knowledge argument, and is best forgotten.
 
Conee, Earl (1985). Physicalism and phenomenal properties. Philosophical Quarterly 35 (July):296-302.   (Cited by 5 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Conee, Earl (1994). Phenomenal knowledge. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 72 (2):136-150.   (Cited by 23 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 







 
Crane, Tim (2003). Subjective facts. In Real Metaphysics: Essays in Honour of D. H. Mellor. New York: Routledge.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: An important theme running through D.H. Mellor’s work is his realism, or as I shall call it, his objectivism: the idea that reality as such is how it is, regardless of the way we represent it, and that philosophical error often arises from confusing aspects of our subjective representation of the world with aspects of the world itself. Thus central to Mellor’s work on time has been the claim that the temporal A-series (previously called ‘tense’) is unreal while the B-series (the series of ‘dates’) is real. The A-series is something which is a product of our representation of the world, but not a feature of reality itself. And in other, less central, areas of his work, this kind of theme has been repeated: ‘Objective decision making’ (1980) argues that the right way to understand decision theory is as a theory of what is the objectively correct decision, the one that will actually as a matter of fact achieve your intended goal, rather than the one that is justified purely in terms of what you believe, regardless of whether the belief is true or false. ‘I and now’ (1989) argues against a substantial subjective conception of the self, using analogies between subjective and objective ways of thinking about time and subjective and objective ways of thinking about the self. And in the paper which shall be the focus of my attention here, ‘Nothing like experience’ (1992), Mellor..





 
Cummins, Robert E. (1984). The mind of the matter: Comments on Paul Churchland. Philosophy of Science Association 1984.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1991). "Epiphenomenal" qualia? In Consciousness Explained. Little, Brown.   (Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Dennett, Daniel C. (2006). What robomary knows. In Torin Alter & Sven Walter (eds.), Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 8 | Google) 
 
Deutsch, Max (ms). Subjective physical facts.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Endicott, Ronald P. (1995). The refutation by analogous ectoqualia. Southern Journal of Philosophy 33 (1):19-30.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Fürst, Martina (2004). Qualia and phenomenal concepts as basis of the knowledge argument. Acta Analytica 19 (32):143-152.   (Google)
Abstract: The central attempt of this paper is to explain the underlying intuitions of Frank Jackson’s “Knowledge Argument” that the epistemic gap between phenomenal knowledge and physical knowledge points towards a corresponding ontological gap. The first step of my analysis is the claim that qualia are epistemically special because the acquisition of the phenomenal concept of a quale x requires the experience of x. Arguing what is so special about phenomenal concepts and pointing at the inherence-relation with the qualia they pick out, I give compelling reasons for the existence of ontologically distinct entities. Finally I conclude that phenomenal knowledge is caused by phenomenal properties and the instantiation of these properties is a specific phenomenal fact, which can not be mediated by any form of descriptive information. So it will be shown that phenomenal knowledge must count as the possession of very special information necessarily couched in subjective, phenomenal conceptions
 
Furash, G. (1989). Frank Jackson's knowledge argument against materialism. Dialogue 32 (October):1-6.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google)




  
Gava, Giacomo (2004). The Knowledge Argument: A Survey and a Proposal. Padova: Cleup Ed Padova.   (Google) 
 
Gertler, Brie (1999). A defense of the knowledge argument. Philosophical Studies 93 (3):317-336.   (Cited by 13 | Google | More links) 






 
Gertler, Brie (2005). The Knowledge Argument. In The Encyclopedia of Philosophy. MacMillan.   (Google)
Abstract: The definitive statement of the Knowledge Argument was formulated by Frank Jackson, in a paper entitled “Epiphenomenal Qualia” that appeared in The Philosophical Quarterly in 1982. Arguments in the same spirit had appeared earlier (Broad 1925, Robinson 1982), but Jackson’s argument is most often compared with Thomas Nagel’s argument in “What is it Like to be a Bat?” (1974). Jackson, however, takes pains to distinguish his argument from Nagel’s. This entry will follow standard practice in focusing on Jackson’s argument, though I will also describe the main points of alleged similarity and dissimilarity between these two arguments
 
Gleeson, Andres (1999). Deducing the mind. Inquiry 42 (3-4):385-410.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Frank Jackson has argued that, in principle, all mental truths are deducible from all physical science truths: 'deducibility'. Jackson's defence of deducibility relies upon the method for producing naturalistic definitions of mental states championed in the analytical functionalism of himself, David Lewis, and others. Two arguments are presented. The first contends that the particular naturalistic definitions of analytical functionalism fail because they do not take account of the extraordinary kind of bodily animation displayed by human beings, which I argue is necessary to (at least one kind of) mentality; machines lacking (at least this one kind of) mentality can satisfy the naturalistic definitions of analytical functionalism. So Jackson's defence of deducibility fails as it stands. The second argument contends that no naturalistic conceptual analysis of the mental can be adequate, because understanding (certain) mental concepts requires a special kind of affective reaction here named 'personal response', while understanding naturalistic concepts does not require this- therefore no naturalistic analysis can ever capture our common-sense mental concepts. The upshot is that Jackson's defence of deducibility cannot be repaired. No defence of deducibility will work which relies upon the possibility of naturalistic conceptual analyses of mentality








 
Graham, George & Horgan, Terence E. (2005). Mary Mary au contraire: Reply to Raffman. Philosophical Studies 122 (2):203-12.   (Google | More links) 





 
Graham, George & Horgan, Terence E. (2000). Mary Mary, quite contrary. Philosophical Studies 99 (1):59-87.   (Cited by 14 | Google | More links) 






 
Harman, Gilbert (1993). Can science understand the mind? In Gilbert Harman (ed.), Conceptions of the Human Mind: Essays on Honor of George A. Miller. Lawrence Erlbaum.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google)




  
Hellie, Benj (2004). Inexpressible truths and the allure of the knowledge argument. In Yujin Nagasawa, Peter Ludlow & Daniel Stoljar (eds.), There's Something About Mary. The Mit Press.   (Google)
Abstract: I argue on linguistic grounds that when Mary comes to know what it's like to see a red thing, she comes to know a certain inexpressible truth about the character of her own experience. This affords a "no concept" reply to the knowledge argument. The reason the Knowledge Argument has proven so intractable may be that we believe that an inexpressible concept and an expressible concept cannot have the same referent.
 
Hershfield, Jeffrey (1998). Lycan on the subjectivity of the mental. Philosophical Psychology 11 (2):229-38.   (Google)
Abstract: The subjectivity of the mental consists in the idea that there are features of our mental states that are perspectival in that they are accessible only from the first-person point of view. This is held to be a problem for materialist theories of mind, since such theories contend that there is nothing about the mind that cannot be fully described from a third-person (objective) point of view. Lycan suggests a notion of “phenomenal information” that is held to be perspectival in the relevant sense but also perfectly objective, since it is explicated in terms of the computational roles of higher-order mental representations. I argue that his project fails because phenomenal information is accessible to observers, and hence it fails to be perspectival in the required sense. That sense demands that there be aspects of our conscious experiences that cannot be intersubjectively compared
 
Hodgson, David (2008). The knowledge argument: A response to Elizabeth Schier. Journal of Consciousness Studies 15 (4):112-115.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: I much appreciated Elizabeth Schier's paper on Frank Jackson's knowledge argument, published in the January 2008 issue of Journal of Consciousness Studies (Schier, 2008) -- in part, I confess, because of resonances with my gestalt argument for free will (Hodgson, 2001; 2002; 2005; 2007a,b). I would like to offer two comments on this paper





 
Holman, Emmett L. (2006). Dualism and secondary quality eliminativism: Putting a new spin on the knowledge argument. Philosophical Studies 128 (2):229-56.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Frank Jackson formulated his knowledge argument as an argument for dualism. In this paper I show how the argument can be modified to also establish the irreducibility of the secondary qualities to the properties of physical theory, and ultimately






 
Horowitz, Amir & Jacobson-Horowitz, Hilla (2005). The knowledge argument and higher-order properties. Ratio 18 (1):48-64.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 







 
Howell, Robert J. (2007). The knowledge argument and objectivity. Philosophical Studies 135 (2).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper I argue that Frank Jackson





 
Jackson, Frank (1982). Epiphenomenal qualia. Philosophical Quarterly 32 (April):127-136.   (Cited by 566 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 






















 
Jackson, Frank (2003). Mind and illusion. In Anthony O'Hear (ed.), Minds and Persons. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 19 | Google | More links) 




 
Jacquette, Dale (1995). The blue banana trick: Dennett on Jackson's color scientist. Theoria 61 (3):217-30.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Jackson, Frank (2006). The knowledge argument, diaphanousness, representationalism. In Torin Alter & Sven Walter (eds.), Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Jackson, Frank (1986). What Mary didn't know. Journal of Philosophy 83 (May):291-5.   (Cited by 227 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Jutronic, Dunja (2004). The knowledge argument--some comments. Croatian Journal of Philosophy 4 (11):193-197.   (Google) 
 
Kahane, Guy (2010). Feeling pain for the very first time: The normative knowledge argument. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 80 (1):20-49.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper I present a new argument against internalist theories of practical reason. My argument is inpired by Frank Jackson's celebrated Knowledge Argument. I ask what will happen when an agent experiences pain for the first time. Such an agent, I argue, will gain new normative knowledge that internalism cannot explain. This argument presents a similar difficulty for other subjectivist and constructivist theories of practical reason and value. I end by suggesting that some debates in meta-ethics and in the philosophy of mind might be more closely intertwined than philosophers in either area would like to believe





 
Kallestrup, Jesper (2006). Epistemological physicalism and the knowledge argument. American Philosophical Quarterly 43 (1):1-23.   (Google)
Abstract: This paper offers a new solution to the knowledge argument. Both a priori and a posteriori physicalists reject the claim that Mary does not know all the facts, but they do so for different reasons. While the former think that Mary gains no new knowledge of any fact, the latter think that Mary gains new knowledge of an old fact. This paper argues that on a broad understanding of what counts as physical, it is consistent with physicalism that Mary does not know all the physical facts, and that on a narrow understanding, it is consistent with physicalism that Mary knows all the physical facts, but not all the facts. Either way, Mary gains new knowledge of a new fact that is not non-physical. The resultant view
 
Levin, Janet (1986). Could love be like a heatwave? Physicalism and the subjective character of experience. Philosophical Studies 49 (March):245-61.   (Cited by 14 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Lewis, David (1990). What experience teaches. In William G. Lycan (ed.), Mind and Cognition. Blackwell.   (Cited by 99 | Annotation | Google)




  
Loar, Brian (1990). Phenomenal states. Philosophical Perspectives 4:81-108.   (Cited by 156 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Ludlow, Peter; Nagasawa, Yujin & Stoljar, Daniel (eds.) (2004). There's Something About Mary: Essays on Phenomenal Consciousness and Frank Jackson's Knowledge Argument. MIT Press.   (Cited by 3 | Google)
Abstract: The arguments presented in this comprehensive collection have important implications for the philosophy of mind and the study of consciousness.
 
Lycan, William G. (1995). A limited defense of phenomenal information. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Imprint Academic.   (Cited by 17 | Annotation | Google)




  
Lycan, William G. (1998). Phenomenal information again: It is both real and intrinsically perspectival. Philosophical Psychology 11 (2):239-42.   (Google)
Abstract: In two recent publications I argued against Nemirow and Lewis that there is distinctive, irreducibly phenomenal and perspectival information of the sort alleged by Jackson; but I gave an account of such information that is entirely compatible with a materialist view of human subjects. Hershfield argues that the latter account is inadequate, in that it fails to support the claim that the information it characterizes is irreducibly phenomenal or perspectival. I reply that Hershfield's conclusion does not follow from his argument's premises
 
Lycan, William G. (2003). Perspectival representation and the knowledge argument. In Quentin Smith & Aleksandar Jokic (eds.), Consciousness: New Philosophical Perspectives. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 8 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Someday there will be no more articles written about the





 
Malatesti, Luca (2004). The Knowledge Argument. Dissertation, University of Stirling   (Google | More links) 




 
Mandik, Pete (2010). Swamp Mary's revenge: Deviant phenomenal knowledge and physicalism. Philosophical Studies 148 (2).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Deviant phenomenal knowledge is knowing what it’s like to have experiences of, e.g., red without actually having had experiences of red. Such a knower is a deviant. Some physicalists have argued and some anti-physicalists have denied that the possibility of deviants undermines anti-physicalism and the Knowledge Argument. The current paper presents new arguments defending the deviant-based attacks on anti-physicalism. Central to my arguments are considerations concerning the psychosemantic underpinnings of deviant phenomenal knowledge. I argue that physicalists are in a superior position to account for the conditions in virtue of which states of deviants constitute representations of phenomenal facts





 
McConnell, J. (1995). In defense of the knowledge argument. Philosophical Topics 22 (3):157-187.   (Cited by 8 | Annotation | Google)




  
McGeer, Victoria (2003). The trouble with Mary. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 84 (4):384-393.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 







 
Meyer, Ulrich (2001). The knowledge argument, abilities, and metalinguistic beliefs. Erkenntnis 55 (3):325-347.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 






 
Montero, Barbara (2007). Physicalism could be true even if Mary learns something new. Philosophical Quarterly 57 (227):176-189.   (Google | More links) 




 
Moreland, James P. (2003). The knowledge argument revisited. International Philosophical Quarterly 43 (2):218-228.   (Google) 
 
Nagasawa, Yujin (online). Knowledge argument.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The knowledge argument is an argument against physicalism that was first formulated by Frank Jackson in 1982. While Jackson no longer endorses it, it is still regarded as one of the most important arguments in the philosophy of mind. Physicalism is the metaphysical thesis that, roughly speaking, everything in this world—including tables, galaxies, cheese cakes, cars, atoms, and even our sensations— are ultimately physical. The knowledge argument attempts to undermine this thesis by appealing to the following simple imaginary scenario: Mary is confined to a black-and-white room, is educated through black-and-white books and through lectures relayed on black-and white television. In this way she learns everything there is to know about the physical nature of the world. She knows all the physical facts about us and our environment, in a wide sense of ‘physical’ which includes everything in completed physics, chemistry, and neurophysiology, and all there is to know about the causal and relational facts consequent upon all this, including of course functional roles. (Jackson 1986, p. 291) The knowledge argument says that if physicalism is true, Mary knows everything in this world. However, it seems obvious that her knowledge is not yet complete. Suppose that..






 
Nagasawa, Yujin (2002). The knowledge argument against dualism. Theoria 68 (3):205-223.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Paul Churchland argues that Frank Jackson











 
Nagasawa, Yujin (2010). The knowledge argument and epiphenomenalism. Erkenntnis 72 (1).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Frank Jackson endorses epiphenomenalism because he thinks that his knowledge argument undermines physicalism. One of the most interesting criticisms of Jackson’s position is what I call the ‘inconsistency objection’. The inconsistency objection says that Jackson’s position is untenable because epiphenomenalism undermines the knowledge argument. The inconsistency objection has been defended by various philosophers independently, including Michael Watkins, Fredrik Stjernberg, and Neil Campbell. Surprisingly enough, while Jackson himself admits explicitly that the inconsistency objection is ‘the most powerful reply to the knowledge argument’ he knows of, it has never been discussed critically. The aim of this paper is to evaluate the objection and to identify and consider its implications. The objection is alleged to be based on a causal theory of knowledge. I argue that the objection fails by showing that any causal theory of knowledge is such that it is either false or does not support the inconsistency objection. In order to defend my argument, I offer a hypothesis concerning phenomenal knowledge





 
Nanay, Bence (2009). Imagining, recognizing and discriminating: Reconsidering the ability hypothesis. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 79 (3):699-717.   (Google | More links) 




 
Nemirow, Laurence (2006). So this is what it's like: A defense of the ability hypothesis. In Torin Alter & Sven Walter (eds.), Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Nemirow, Laurence (1995). Understanding rules. Journal of Philosophy 92 (1):28-43.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 





 
Newton, Natika (1986). Churchland on direct introspection of brain states. Analysis 46 (March):97-102.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google)




  
Nicholson, Mr D. M. (ms). From a flaw in the knowledge argument to a physicalist account of qualia.   (Google)
Abstract: The Knowledge argument based on the grey Mary thought experiment cannot be claimed as a basis for rejecting physicalism. First, because it is flawed, being so formulated as to predetermine the outcome of the thought experiment in favour of a refutation of physicalism. Second, because, once this is recognised, it becomes clear that there is one - and only one - account of the qualia-physical relationship that will permit physicalism to survive the thought experiment itself. It is suggested that the position in question is worthy of further consideration as a reasonable candidate theory for a physicalist account of qualia
 
Nicholson, Dennis (ms). Solving the mind-body problem - the real significance of the knowledge argument.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The Knowledge Argument is misconstructed. Knowing that it is ‘just obvious’ that Mary will learn something new on leaving her black and white room, we nevertheless assume she can acquire a complete knowledge of the physical inside it – thereby predetermining the outcome of the thought experiment in favour of a refutation of physicalism. If we reformulate the argument to leave the question of what she can learn in the room open, it becomes clear, not only that physicalism can survive the Knowledge Argument, but also that there is only one perspective on the relationship between qualia and the physical that will permit it to do so. If physicalism is true, this perspective must be the correct view of the qualia-physical relationship – the solution to the mind-body problem, a conclusion supported by its ability to resolve a number of associated difficulties, including Kripke’s problem for proposed identities and Chalmers’ Hard Problem








 
Nida-Rumelin, Martine (1998). On belief about experiences: An epistemological distinction applied to the knowledge argument against physicalism. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 58 (1):51-73.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links) 





 
Nida-Rumelin, Martine (1997). On belief about experiences: An epistemological distinction applied to the knowledge argument. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 58 (1):51-73.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links) 




 
Nida-Rumelin, Martine (online). Qualia: The Knowledge Argument. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Nida-Rumelin, Martine (online). The knowledge argument. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.   (Google) 
 
Nida-Rumelin, Martine (1995). What Mary couldn't know: Belief about phenomenal states. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Ferdinand Schoningh.   (Cited by 15 | Annotation | Google)




  
Noordhof, Paul (2003). Something like ability. Australian Journal of Philosophy 81 (1):21-40.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: One diagnosis of what is wrong with the Knowledge Argument rests on the Ability Hypothesis. This couples an ability analysis of knowing what an experience is like together with a denial that phenomenal propositions exist. I argue against both components. I consider three arguments against the existence of phenomenal propositions and find them wanting. Nevertheless I deny that knowing phenomenal propositions is part of knowing what an experience is like. I provide a hybrid account of knowing what an experience is like which is the coherent expression of a single idea: knowing what an experience is like is knowing what it would be like to have the phenomenal content of the experience as the content of an experience one is currently having. I explain how my conclusions indicate that the focus of discussion should be on the alleged explanatory gap between phenomenal facts and physical facts and not on the Knowledge Argument. The latter is a poor expression of the difficulty Physicalists face









 
Nordby, Knut (1990). Vision in a complete achromat: A personal account. In R. F. Hess, L. T. Sharpe & K. Nordby (eds.), Night Vision: Basic, Clinical and Applied Aspects. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 8 | Google | More links) 




 
Nordby, Knut (2006). What is this thing you call color? Some thoughts by a totally color-blind person. In Torin Alter & Sven Walter (eds.), Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Onof, Christian (2008). property dualism, epistemic normativity, and the limits of naturalism. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 76 (1):60-85.   (Google)
Abstract: This paper examines some consequences of the (quasi-)epiphenomenalism implied by a property dualistic view of phenomenal consciousness. The focus is upon the variation of phenomenal content over time. A thought-experiment is constructed to support two claims. The weaker claim exhibits an incompatibility which arises in certain logically possible situations between a conscious subject’s epistemic norms and the requirement that one be aware of one’s conscious experience. This could be interpreted as providing some epistemic grounds for the postulation of bridging laws between the physical/functional and phenomenal domains. The stronger claim has it that the ontology of property dualism is not properly able to account for the certainty I have of being phenomenally conscious. The problem is viewed as resulting from the neglect of the intensional context involved in a proper representation of the argument for property dualism. It is argued that only a transcendental move can do justice to this certainty I have.
 
Papineau, David (1993). Physicalism, consciousness, and the antipathetic fallacy. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 71 (2):169-83.   (Cited by 24 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 






 
Papineau, David (1995). The antipathetic fallacy and the boundaries of consciousness. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Ferdinand Schoningh.   (Cited by 10 | Google) 
 
Pelczar, Michael W. (2005). Enlightening the fully informed. Philosophical Studies 126 (1):29-56.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper develops a response to the knowledge argument against physicalism. The response is both austere, in that it does not concede the existence of non-physical information (much less non-physical facts), and natural, in that it acknowledges the alethic character of phenomenal knowledge and learning. I argue that such a response has all the advantages and none of the disadvantages of existing objections to the knowledge argument. Throughout, the goal is to develop a response that is polemically effective in addition to theoretically sound








 
Pelczar, Michael (2009). The knowledge argument, the open question argument, and the moral problem. Synthese 171 (1).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Someone who knew everything about the world’s physical nature could, apparently, suffer from ignorance about various aspects of conscious experience. Someone who knew everything about the world’s physical and mental nature could, apparently, suffer from moral ignorance. Does it follow that there are ways the world is, over and above the way it is physically or psychophysically? This paper defends a negative answer, based on a distinction between knowing the fact that p and knowing that p. This distinction is made intelligible by reference to criterial connections between the possession of moral or phenomenal knowledge, and the satisfaction of cognitively neutral conditions of desire and experiential history. The existence of such connections in the moral case makes for an efficient dissolution of the so-called moral problem





 
Pereboom, Derk (1994). Bats, brain scientists, and the limitations of introspection. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 54 (2):315-29.   (Google | More links) 





 
Perry, John (2001). Time, consciousness and the knowledge argument. In The Importance of Time: Proceedings of the Philosophy of Time Society, 1995-2000. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Pub.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Pettit, Philip (2004). Motion blindness and the knowledge argument. In Peter Ludlow, Yujin Nagasawa & Daniel Stoljar (eds.), There's Something About Mary: Essays on Phenomenal Consciousness and Frank Jackson's Knowledge Argument. MIT Press.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In a now famous thought experiment, Frank jackson asked us t0 imagine an omniscient scientist, Mary, who is coniincd in a black-and-white room and then released into the world 0f color (jackson 1982; jackson 1986; cf. Braddon—Mitch<-:11 and Jackson 1996). Assuming that she is omniscicnt in respect of all physical facts—roughiy, all the facts available to physics and all the facts that they in turn Hx or determine-physicalism would suggest that there is no new fact Mary can discover after emancipation; physicalism holds that all facts are physical in the relevant sense (for a fuller statement scc Pettit 1993; jackson 1998). Yet we cannot help but feel that coming out of that room would be an occasion of dramatic enlightenment and, in particular, an occasion for learning facts to do with how red or yellow or blue 100ks or, as it is usually said, with what it is like t0 sec red or yellow or blue. Many in the black-and—whit<—: room knew all the physical facts about the world, where these may be taken to include three sorts of color facts: objcctual facts, as to what surface colors different objects have, assuming as I shall do throughout—that colors are properties of objects; intentional facts, as to which colors different objects 0r apparent objects are represented as having in the subjc-:ct’s experience, rightly or wrongly; and nonintentional facts, about what such color experiences are like in their effects on subiccts—wh<—:ther they are comforting, or arousing, or whatever. But, according to the argument, Mary didn’t know how any color looks or, equivalently, what color experience is like in itself, not just in its effects O1'1 subjects. This particular nonintentional fact about the quality of color c-zxpc-2ri<—:ncc-—this phenomenal fact, as it is often describcd—she did not..





 
Prinz, Jesse J. (ms). Mental maintenance: A response to the knowledge argument.   (Google) 
 
Raffman, Diana (2005). Even zombies can be surprised: A reply to Graham and Horgan. Philosophical Studies 122 (2):189-202.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 





 
Raymont, Paul (1995). Tye's criticism of the knowledge argument. Dialogue 34 (4):713-26.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Raymont, Paul (1999). The know-how response to Jackson's knowledge argument. Journal of Philosophical Research 24 (January):113-26.   (Cited by 6 | Google)
Abstract: I defend Frank Jackson's knowledge argument against physicalism in the philosophy of mind from a criticism that has been advanced by Laurence Nemirow and David Lewis. According to their criticism, what Mary lacked when she was in her black and white room was a set of abilities; she did not know how to recognize or imagine certain types of experience from a first-person perspective. Her subsequent discovery of what it is like to experience redness amounts to no more than her acquisition of these abilities. The physicalist can admit this, since it does not commit one to the view that there are any facts of which Mary was ignorant (in spite of her exhaustive knowledge of truths about the physical world). I argue against this view, on the grounds that the knowledge of what an experience is like cannot be equated with the possession of any set of abilities
 
Robinson, Howard M. (1993). Dennett on the knowledge argument. Analysis 53 (3):174-7.   (Cited by 7 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Robinson, Daniel N. (1993). Epiphenomenalism, laws, and properties. Philosophical Studies 69 (1):1-34.   (Cited by 12 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Robinson, William S. (2002). Jackson's apostasy. Philosophical Studies 111 (3):277-293.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Robinson, Howard M. (1993). The anti-materialist strategy and the "knowledge argument". In Howard M. Robinson (ed.), Objections to Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (1983). Reductionism and knowledge. In L.S. Cauman, Isaac Levi, Charles D. Parsons & Robert Schwartz (eds.), How Many Questions? Hacket.   (Google) 
 
Schier, Elizabeth (2008). The knowledge argument and the inadequacy of scientific knowledge. Journal of Consciousness Studies 15 (1):39-62.   (Google)
Abstract: Recently a number of authors have responded to the knowl-edge argument by suggesting that Mary could learn about new physi-cal facts upon release (Flanagan, 1992; Mandik, 2001; Stoljar, 2001; Van Gulick, 1985). A key step in achieving this is a demonstration that there are facts that can be known via colour experience that cannot be learnt scientifically. In this paper I develop an account of scientific and visual knowledge on which there is a difference between the knowledge provided by science and that provided by vision
 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1984). Churchland on reduction, qualia, and introspection. Philosophy of Science Association 1984.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Skoyles, John R. (ms). The case of Milton: A counter-example to Chalmers' case of Mary.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Chalmers' hard problem confuses within and without-system information. This can be seen in his case of Mary. This neurophysiologist of colour vision raised in a black and white room in an age of a completed neuroscience in spite of her knowing everything about colour vision lacks colour experience. I demonstrate with a counter-example involving Milton, an economist in an age of completed economics, that Chalmers mixes up scientific accountability and accessibility of information processing. There is a profound conceptual difference between the external understanding of information processing in the brain and the internal understanding that participates in it -- as can be illustrated in Aristotles' illusion





 
Stalnaker, Robert (ms). Knowing where we are, and what it is like.   (Google) 
 
Stemmer, Nathan (1989). Physicalism and the argument from knowledge. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 67 (March):84-91.   (Cited by 7 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 








 
Stjernberg, Fredrik (online). Not so epiphenomenal qualia.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Stoljar, Daniel & Nagasawa, Yujin (2003). Introduction to There's Something About Mary. In Peter Ludlow, Daniel Stoljar & Yujin Nagasawa (eds.), There's Something About Mary.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Mary is confined to a black-and-white room, is educated through black-and-white books and through lectures relayed on black-and white television. In this way she learns everything there is to know about the physical nature of the world. She knows all the physical facts about us and our environment, in a wide sense of 'physical' which includes everything in completed physics, chemistry, and neurophysiology, and all there is to know about the causal and relational facts consequent upon all this, including of course functional roles. If physicalism is true, she knows all there is to know. For to suppose otherwise is to suppose that there is more to know than every physical fact, and that is just what physicalis..





 
Thau, Michael (2007). Thau on perception - response to Jackson. Philosophical Studies 132 (3):607-623.   (Google) 
 
Thomas, Nigel J. T. (online). Mary doesn't know science: On misconceiving a science of consciousness.   (Cited by 2 | Google)
Abstract: The so called "Knowledge Argument" of Frank Jackson (1982, 1986) 1 claims to show that there is something about the human mind that must inevitably escape the grasp of physical science: "There are truths about . . . people ( . . . ) which escape the physicalist story" (Jackson, 1986). In effect, materialism is false, and science, as opposed to metaphysics, cannot hope to attain to an understanding of consciousness
 
Thompson, Evan (1992). Novel colors. Philosophical Studies 68 (3):321-49.   (Cited by 10 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Thompson, David L. (online). On naturalizing intentionality.   (Google)
Abstract: Outline by Section: INTRODUCTION HUSSERL'S TRANSCENDENTAL POSITION Brentano's Notion of Intentionality Frege's Notion of Sinn Husserl's Transcendental Position Intentional Relations are not Causal. Realism is Wrong, Objects must be Meaningful Psychological States are Empirical. Meanings cannot be In-Themselves, but always for an Ego SEARLE'S THEORY OF INTENTIONALITY CONFRONTATION OF SEARLE'S THEORY WITH THE FOUR THESES Searle Intentionalizes or Trivializes Causation Searle is still a Realist Visual Experience is a Thing-In-Itself Intentional States Presented as Stopping Points CONCLUSION
 
Tye, Michael (2000). Knowing what it is like: The ability hypothesis and the knowledge argument. In Consciousness, Color, and Content. MIT Press.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Unknown, Unknown (online). The know-how response to Jackson's knowledge argument.   (Google) 
 
van Gulick, Robert (forthcoming). Jackson's change of mind: Representationalism, a priorism, and the knowledge argument. In Ian Ravenscroft (ed.), Minds, Worlds & Conditionals: Themes From the Philosophy of Frank Jackson. Oup.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
van Gulick, Robert (2004). So many ways of saying no to Mary. In Peter Ludlow, Yujin Nagasawa & Daniel Stoljar (eds.), There's Something About Mary: Essays on Phenomenal Consciousness and Frank Jackson's Knowledge Argument. MIT Press.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Vierkant, Tillmann (2002). Zombie Mary and the blue banana. On the compatibility of the 'knowledge argument' with the argument from modality. Psyche 8 (19).   (Google) 
 
Walter, Sven (2002). Terry, Terry, quite contrary. Grazer Philosophische Studien 63 (1):103-22.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In 'Jackson on physical information and qualia'(1984) Terry Horgan defended physicalism against Frank Jackson's Knowledge Argument by raising what later has been called the 'mode of presentation reply'- arguingthatthe Knowledge Argumentis fallacious because itsubtly equivocates on two different readings of 'physical information'. In 'Mary, Mary, quite contrary' (2000) however, George Graham and Terry Horgan maintain that none of the replies against Jackson has yet been successful, not even Horgan's own 1984 rejoinder.Tosubstantiate their claim, they present an allegedly improved version of the Knowledge Argument, the 'Mary Mary Argument' whose default moral is property-dualism. In section 1, I will set the scene by making some clarifying remarks regarding Jackson's original argument. In section 2, I will consider several objections to the most promising physicalist rejoinder to the Knowledge Argument, the mode of presentation reply. In section 3 I will discuss the Mary Mary Argument and propose the indexical account of consciousness that, as it happens, is based on Horgan's own 1984 account as a possible solution. Finally,in section 4, I will argue that to the extent that the Mary Mary Argument exceeds the force of Jackson's original challenge it coincides with Joe Levine's Explanatory Gap Argument






 
Warner, Richard (1986). A challenge to physicalism. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 64 (September):249-65.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 








 
Watkins, Michael (1989). The knowledge argument against the knowledge argument. Analysis 49 (June):158-60.   (Cited by 4 | Annotation | Google)




  
Wilson, Jessica M. (2002). Review of John Perry's Knowledge, Possibility, and Consciousness. Philosophical Review 111:598-601.   (Google)
Abstract: Perry, in this lucid, deep, and entertaining book (based on his 1999 Jean Nicod lectures), supposes that type-identity physicalism is antecedently plausible, and that rejecting this thesis requires good reason (this is
 
Witonsky, Abe (2003). A defense of Michael Lockwood's anti-physicalist argument. Journal of Philosophical Research 28:415-419.   (Google) 
 
Zemach, Eddy M. (1990). Churchland, introspection, and dualism. Philosophia 20 (December):3-13.   (Google | More links) 




 
1.3b Zombies and the Conceivability Argument




Alter, Torin (online). Garrett on causal essentialism and zombies.   (Google) 
 
Alter, Torin (2007). Imagining subjective absence: Marcus on zombies. Disputatio 2:91-101.   (Google)
Abstract: Many philosophers accept the conceivability of zombies: creatures that lack consciousness but are physically and functionally identical to conscious human beings. Many also believe that the conceivability of zombies supports their metaphysical possibility. And most agree that if zombies are metaphysically possible, then physicalism is false. So, the claim that zombies are conceivable may have considerable significance.1
 
Alter, Torin, Reply to Sawyer 2005 central division apa.   (Google)
Abstract: Sawyer characterizes the zombie intuition as the claim that zombies are metaphysically possible. That’s not what I mean by the phrase. On my usage, ‘the zombie intuition’ refers to a conceivability claim: the claim that there’s no a priori incoherence in the hypothesis of a minimal physical/functional duplicate of the actual world but without consciousness, i.e., that PT&~Q is conceivable. The claim is the first step of a two-step argument, the second step of which is to infer the corresponding metaphysical possibility. The inference is controversial, but that’s not my concern here. By ‘the zombie intuition’, I mean the first step, which is a claim of conceivability, not metaphysical possibility
 
Aranyosi, István (forthcoming). A new argument for mind-brain identity. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science.   (Google)
Abstract: In this paper I undertake the tasks of reconsidering Feigl’s notion of a ‘nomological dangler’ in light of recent discussion about the viability of accommodating phenomenal properties, or qualia, within a physicalist picture of reality, and of constructing an argument to the effect that nomological danglers, including the way qualia are understood to be related to brain states by contemporary dualists, are extremely unlikely. I offer a probabilistic argument to the effect that merely nomological danglers are extremely unlikely, the only probabilistically coherent candidates being ‘anomic danglers’ (not even nomically correlated) and ‘necessary danglers’ (more than merely nomically correlated). After I show, based on similar probabilistic reasoning, that the first disjunct (anomic danglers) is very unlikely, I conclude that the identity thesis is the only remaining candidate for the mental/physical connection. The novelty of the argument is that it brings probabilistic considerations in favour of physicalism, a move that has been neglected in the recent burgeoning literature on the subject. 

 
Aranyosi, Istvan A. (2005). Chalmers' zombie argument. In Type-A Dualism: A Novel Theory of the Mental-Physical Nexus. Dissertation, Central European University.   (Google) 
 
Aranyosi, István (2010). Powers and the mind–body problem. International Journal of Philosophical Studies 18 (1):57 – 72.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper proposes a new line of attack on the conceivability argument for mind-body property dualism, based on the causal account of properties, according to which properties have their conditional powers essentially. It is argued that the epistemic possibility of physical but not phenomenal duplicates of actuality is identical to a metaphysical (understood as broadly logical) possibility, but irrelevant for establishing the falsity of physicalism. The proposed attack is in many ways inspired by a standard, broadly Kripkean approach to epistemic and metaphysical modality









 
Aydede, Murat, Are phenomenal zombies really conceivable?   (Google)
Abstract: Zombies, as conceived by philosophers these days, are supposed to be creatures that are physically indistinguishable from normal people that nevertheless completely lack phenomenal consciousness. The kind of zombie I want to focus on is one that is molecule- by-molecule identical to a healthy, normal, adult human being living in a world physically like ours — indeed this might be our own actual world. To make things more concrete, pick any such person that you actually know. Let this be John. John is not a zombie. Now consider an exact, perfect, physical replica of John, call him Zhon. Note that because John and Zhon are physically alike, they are also behaviorally and functionally alike. So if you were to encounter Zhon, you could not distinguish him from John. Under the imagined circumstances so far, you would normally expect Zhon to be conscious as well. But let’s stipulate that Zhon has no conscious experiences whatsoever — he’s never had them, nor will he ever have them. So Zhon, according to this stipulation, doesn’t know — indeed cannot know — what it is like to have conscious experiences of any kind. There is nothing it is like to be Zhon. Zhon lacks conscious phenomenology altogether. If Zhon were to be a metaphysically possible creature, he would be a zombie.1 So this is the notion of zombie I would like to focus on. According to many philosophers, Zhon is a possible creature, and that is because Zhon is a conceivable creature. This gives us the argument from zombies against physicalism. Physicalism is the doctrine that says: all that exist is physical through and through, including conscious minds and their conscious experiences. The zombie argument, as we might call it, is a species of conceivability arguments: 1. If Zhon is conceivable, then Zhon is possible. 2. Zhon is conceivable. 3. Hence, Zhon is possible. Now since the choice of Zhon was arbitrary, we can, of course, generalize the argument to all zombies like Zhon — that is, to zombies that are physically indistinguishable, in relevant respects, to healthy, normal, adult human beings..
 
Aydede, Murat & Guzeldere, Guven (2004). Cognitive architecture, concepts, and introspection: An information-theoretic solution to the problem of phenomenal consciousness. [Journal (on-Line/Unpaginated)] (in Press) 39 (2):197--255.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This essay is a sustained attempt to bring new light to some of the perennial problems in philosophy of mind surrounding phenomenal consciousness and introspection through developing an account of sensory and phenomenal concepts. Building on the information-theoretic framework of Dretske (1981), we present an informational psychosemantics as it applies to what we call sensory concepts, concepts that apply, roughly, to so-called secondary qualities of objects. We show that these concepts have a special informational character and semantic structure that closely tie them to the brain states realizing conscious qualitative experiences. We then develop an account of introspection which exploits this special nature of sensory concepts. The result is a new class of concepts, which, following recent terminology, we call phenomenal concepts: these concepts refer to phenomenal experience itself and are the vehicles used in introspection. On our account, the connection between sensory and phenomenal concepts is very tight: it consists in different semantic uses of the same cognitive structures underlying the sensory concepts, such as the concept of red. Contrary to widespread opinion, we show that information theory contains all the resources to satisfy internalist intuitions about phenomenal consciousness, while not offending externalist ones. A consequence of this account is that it explains and predicts the so-called conceivability arguments against physicalism on the basis of the special nature of sensory and phenomenal concepts. Thus we not only show why physicalism is not threatened by such arguments, but also demonstrate its strength in virtue of its ability to predict and explain away such arguments in a principled way. However, we take the main contribution of this work to be what it provides in addition to a response to those conceivability arguments, namely, a substantive account of the interface between sensory and conceptual systems and the mechanisms of introspection as based on the special nature of the information flow between them





 
Aydede, Murat & Guzeldere, Guven (2001). Consciousness, conceivability arguments, and perspectivalism: The dialectics of the debate. Communication and Cognition 34 (1-2):99-122.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 




 
Aydede, Murat (online). On the conceivability of phenomenal zombies with "sensory-perceptual" systems that are informationally identical to ours.   (Google)
Abstract: The spokesperson in the Pentagon press room announces the availability of a breakthrough new technology. She says it is the first brain-implantable product of a larger project for developing cybernetic organisms (cyborgs) with new and enhanced sensory capabilities that will also have civilian uses. On the screen we see a device fitted on the forehead of a cyborg that appears to have hardwired connections to the brain on several points on the skull. The spokesperson calls the device
 
Bailey, Andrew R. (ms). Physicalism and the preposterousness of zombies.   (Google) 
 
Bailey, Andrew R. (ms). The unsoundness of arguments from conceivability.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: It is widely suspected that arguments from conceivability, at least in some of their more notorious instances, are unsound. However, the reasons for the failure of conceivability arguments are less well agreed upon, and it remains unclear how to distinguish between sound and unsound instances of the form. In this paper I provide an analysis of the form of arguments from conceivability, and use this analysis to diagnose a systematic weakness in the argument form which reveals all its instances to be, roughly, either uninformative or unsound. I illustrate this conclusion through a consideration of David Chalmers






 
Bailey, Andrew R., Zombies and epiphenomenalism.   (Google)
Abstract: RÉSUMÉ: Cette étude examine la relation entre la demande que les zombies sont logiquement/métaphysiquement possible et de la position que la conscience phénoménal est epiphenomenal. Il est souvent présumé que la première entraîne ce dernier, et que, par conséquent, toute implausibility dans la notion de conscience epiphenomenalism remet en question la possibilité réelle de zombies. Quatre façons dont les zombist pourrait répondre sont examinées, et je soutiens que les deux les plus fréquemment rencontrés sont insuffisantes, mais les autres—dont l’un est rarement formulés et l’autre nouveaux—sont plus persuasif. Le résultat, cependant, est que le zombist pourraient en effet être confronté à un engagement indésirables à l’epiphenomenalism de conscience
 
Bailey, Andrew R. (2006). Zombies, epiphenomenalism, and physicalist theories of consciousness. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 36 (4).   (Google) 
 
Bailey, Andrew R. (ms). Zombies support biological theories of consciousness.   (Google) 
 
Balog, Katalin (forthcoming). Acquaintance and the mind-body problem. In Christopher Hill & Simone Gozzano (eds.), Identity Theory. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: In this paper I begin to develop an account of the acquaintance that each of us has with our own conscious states and processes. The account is a speculative proposal about human mental architecture and specifically about the nature of the concepts via which we think in first personish ways about our qualia. In a certain sense my account is neutral between physicalist and dualist accounts of consciousness. As will be clear, a dualist could adopt the account I will offer while maintaining that qualia themselves are non-physical properties. In this case the non-physical nature of qualia may play no role in accounting for the features of acquaintance. But although the account could be used by a dualist, its existence provides enormous support for physicalism. In particular it provides the makings of a positive refutation (i.e., a refutation by construction) of the conceivability arguments and the Mary argument for dualism.
 
Balog, Katalin (1999). Conceivability, possibility, and the mind-body problem. Philosophical Review 108 (4):497-528.   (Cited by 31 | Google)
Abstract: This paper was chosen by The Philosopher’s Annual as one of the ten best articles appearing in print in 2000. Reprinted in Volume XXIII of The Philosopher’s Annual. In his very influential book David Chalmers argues that if physicalism is true then every positive truth is a priori entailed by the full physical description – this is called “the a priori entailment thesis – but ascriptions of phenomenal consciousness are not so entailed and he concludes that Physicalism is false. As he puts it, “zombies” are metaphysically possible. I attempt to show (I think successfully) that this argument is refuted by considering an analogous argument in the mouth of a zombie. The conclusion of this argument is false so one of the premises is false. I argue at length that this shows that the original conceivability argument also has a false premise and so is invalid. 
 
Balog, Katalin (forthcoming). In Defense of the Phenomenal Concept Strategy. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research.   (Google)
Abstract: During the last two decades, several different anti-physicalist arguments based on an epistemic or conceptual gap between the phenomenal and the physical have been proposed. The most promising physicalist line of defense in the face of these arguments – the Phenomenal Concept Strategy – is based on the idea that these epistemic and conceptual gaps can be explained by appeal to the nature of phenomenal concepts rather than the nature of non-physical phenomenal properties. Phenomenal concepts, on this proposal, involve unique cognitive mechanisms, but none that could not be fully physically implemented. David Chalmers has recently presented a Master Argument to show that the Phenomenal Concept Strategy – not just this or that version of it, but any version of it – fails. Chalmers argues that the phenomenal concepts posited by such theories are either not physicalistically explicable, or they cannot explain our epistemic situation with regard to qualia. I argue that it is his Master Argument that fails. My claim is his argument does not provide any new reasons to reject the Phenomenal Concept Strategy. I also argue that, although the Phenomenal Concept Strategy is successful in showing that the physicalist is not rationally compelled to give up physicalism in the light of the anti-physicalist arguments, the anti-physicalist is not rationally compelled to give up the anti-physicalist argument in the light of the Phenomenal Concept Strategy either.
 
Balog, Katalin, Illuminati, zombies and metaphysical gridlock.   (Google)
Abstract: In this paper I survey the landscape of anti-physicalist arguments and physicalist responses to them. The anti-physicalist arguments I discuss start from a premise about a conceptual, epistemic, or explanatory gap between physical and phenomenal descriptions and conclude from this – on a priori grounds – that physicalism is false. My primary aim is to develop a master argument to counter these arguments. With this master argument in place, it is apparent that there is a puzzling symmetry between dualist attacks on physicalism and physicalist replies. Each position can be developed in a way to defend itself from attacks from the other position. Therefore the debate comes down to which metaphysical framework provides the better overall explanatory/theoretical framework.
 
Barnes, Gerald W. (2002). Conceivability, explanation, and defeat. Philosophical Studies 108 (3):327-338.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Hill and Levine offer alternative explanations of these conceivabilities, concluding that these conceivabilities are thereby defeated as evidence. However, this strategy fails because their explanations generalize to all conceivability judgments concerning phenomenal states. Consequently, one could defend absolutely any theory of phenomenal states against conceivability arguments in just this way. This result conflicts with too many of our common sense beliefs about the evidential value of conceivability with respect to phenomenal states. The general moral is that the application of such principles of explanatory defeat is neither simple nor straightforward







 
Bealer, George (2002). Modal epistemology and the rationalist renaissance. In Tamar S. Gendler & John Hawthorne (eds.), Conceivability and Possibility. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 21 | Google)
Abstract: The paper begins with a clarification of the notions of intuition (and, in particular, modal intuition), modal error, conceivability, metaphysical possibility, and epistemic possibility. It is argued that two-dimensionalism is the wrong framework for modal epistemology and that a certain nonreductionist approach to the theory of concepts and propositions is required instead. Finally, there is an examination of moderate rationalism
 
Bealer, George (1987). The philosophical limits of scientific essentialism. Philosophical Perspectives 1:289-365.   (Cited by 44 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Scientific essentialism is the view that some necessities (e.g., water = H2O) can be known only with the aid of empirical science. The thesis of the paper is that scientific essentialism does not extend to the central questions of philosophy and that these questions can be answered a priori. The argument is that the evidence required for the defense of scientific essentialism (e.g., twin earth intuitions) is reliable only if the intuitions required by philosophy to answer its central questions is also reliable. Included is an outline of a modal reliabilist theory of basic evidence and a concept-possession account of the reliability of a priori intuition







 
Bennett, Karen (online). Zombies everywhere!   (Google) 
 
Bokulich, Peter (ms). Putting zombies to rest: The role of dynamics in reduction.   (Google)
Abstract: I argue that property dualism is not supported by the purported logical possibility of qualitative zombies. Chalmers
 
Botterell, Andrew (2001). Conceiving what is not there. Journal of Consciousness Studies 8 (8):21-42.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Braddon-Mitchell, David (2003). Qualia and analytical conditionals. Journal of Philosophy 100 (3):111-135.   (Cited by 12 | Google | More links) 




 
Bringsjord, Selmer (1995). In defense of impenetrable zombies. Journal of Consciousness Studies 2 (4):348-351.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links) 





 
Bringsjord, Selmer (1999). The zombie attack on the computational conception of mind. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 59 (1):41-69.   (Cited by 14 | Google | More links) 








 
Brown, Richard (2010). Deprioritizing the A Priori Arguments against Physicalism. Journal of Consciousness Studies 17 (4-5).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper I argue that a priori arguments fail to present any real problem for physicalism. They beg the question against physicalism in the sense that the argument will only seem compelling if one is already assuming that qualitative properties are nonphysical. To show this I will present the reverse-zombie and reverse-knowledge arguments. The only evidence against physicalism is a priori arguments, but there are also a priori arguments against dualism of exactly the same variety. Each of these parity arguments has premises that are just as intuitively plausible, and it cannot be the case that both the traditional scenarios and the reverse-scenarios are all ideally conceivable. Given this one set must be merely prima facie conceivable and only empirical methods will tell us which is which. So, by the time a priori methodology will be of any use it will be too late. 






 
Brown, Richard (2007). Review of Zombies and consciousness by Robert Kirk. Philosophical Psychology 20 (3):12-15.   (Google)
Abstract: This book covers a vast amount of material in the philosophy of mind, which makes it difficult to do justice to its tightly argued and nuanced details. It does, however, have two overarching goals that are visible, so to speak, from space. In the first half of the book Kirk aims to show that, contra his former self, philosophical zombies are not conceivable. By this he means that the zombie scenario as usually constructed contains an unnoticed contradiction, and explaining the contradiction reveals a radical misconception about the nature of phenomenal consciousness. His second aim of the book is to construct a theory of perceptual-phenomenal consciousness that avoids this contradiction. The anti-zombie argument can be stated rather easily. According to the ‘zombist’ there can be a creature that is a molecule-for-molecule-duplicate of me and yet lacks phenomenal consciousness. At the same time they want to hold that we have ‘epistemic access’ to our phenomenal consciousness. These two claims are not consistent with each other. To see why, imagine a zombie world that is identical to ours except in respect of phenomenal consciousness. Since that world is just like ours we can assume that it is causally closed under the physical. Now, continues Kirk, it should be possible to add to that world whatever it is that the zombist thinks will transform it into a world that does have phenomenal consciousness. But since whatever we added would have to be nonphysical, since their world is identical to ours (excepting consciousness), and so could not interact causally with the physical world (which is closed under the physical), it follows that we could not know anything about these ‘e-qualia’. Therefore, we could not have ‘epistemic access’ to them. To make this vivid he offers what he calls the ‘sole-pictures’ argument. Again, consider our zombie world. Let’s add whatever it is that the zombist thinks will transform it into a world like ours. Now let’s imagine that by a “strange shift in the natural laws” of the zombie world the visual processes that in me cause e-qualia instead cause....
 
Brueckner, Anthony L. (2001). Chalmers' conceivability argument for dualism. Analysis 61 (3):187-193.   (Cited by 8 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In The Conscious Mind, D. Chalmers appeals to his semantic framework in order to show that conceivability, as employed in his "zombie" argument for dualism, is sufficient for genuine possibility. I criticize this attempt








 
Chalmers, David J. (1996). Can consciousness be reductively explained? In The Conscious Mind. Oxford University Press.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Chalmers, David J. (2002). Does conceivability entail possibility? In Tamar S. Gendler & John Hawthorne (eds.), Conceivability and Possibility. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 70 | Google | More links)
Abstract: There is a long tradition in philosophy of using a priori methods to draw conclusions about what is possible and what is necessary, and often in turn to draw conclusions about matters of substantive metaphysics. Arguments like this typically have three steps: first an epistemic claim (about what can be known or conceived), from there to a modal claim (about what is possible or necessary), and from there to a metaphysical claim (about the nature of things in the world)





 
Chalmers, David J. (2004). Imagination, indexicality, and intensions. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 68 (1):182-90.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links)
Abstract: John Perry's book Knowledge, Possibility, and Consciousness is a lucid and engaging defense of a physicalist view of consciousness against various anti-physicalist arguments. In what follows, I will address Perry's responses to the three main anti-physicalist arguments he discusses: the zombie argument (focusing on imagination), the knowledge argument (focusing on indexicals), and the modal argument (focusing on intensions)








 
Chalmers, David J. (manuscript). Mind and modality. .   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: What follows are compressed versions of three lectures on the subject of "Mind and Modality", given at Princeton University the week of October 12-16, 1998. The first two form a series; the third stands alone to some extent. All are philosophically technical, and probably of interest mainly to philosophers. I hope that they make sense, at least to those familiar with my book _The Conscious Mind_ . Lecture 1 recapitulates some of the material in the book in a somewhat different form, and adds some further material on conditionals and on Kripke. Note that section has a more or less definitive formalization of the anti-materialist argument from the book (lots of people have asked for this). Lecture 2 pushes deeper into the heart of modality, further investigating the conceivability/possibility relationship and the epistemology of modality (with some material on the scrutability of truth in general), and arguing for a sort of modal rationalism. Lecture 3 gives an analysis of the content of beliefs about experiences, and applies this to a number of epistemological issues, including incorrigibility and the dialectic on "The Myth of the Given"





 
Chalmers, David J. (1999). Materialism and the metaphysics of modality. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 59 (2):473-96.   (Cited by 55 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This appeared in Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 59:473-93, as a response to four papers in a symposium on my book The Conscious Mind . Most of it should be comprehensible without having read the papers in question. This paper is for an audience of philosophers and so is relatively technical. It will probably also help to have read some of the book. (There is a corresponding precis of the book, written for the symposium.) The papers I'm responding to are: Chris Hill & Brian McLaughlin, There are fewer things in reality than are dreamt of in Chalmers' philosophy Brian Loar, David Chalmers' The Conscious Mind Sydney Shoemaker, On David Chalmers' The Conscious Mind Stephen Yablo, Concepts and consciousness Contents







 
Chalmers, David J. (1996). Naturalistic dualism. In The Conscious Mind. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google)




  
Chalmers, David J. (1993). Self-ascription without qualia: A case-study. Behavioral And Brain Sciences 16 (1):35-36.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In Section 5 of his interesting article, Goldman suggests that the consideration of imaginary cases can be valuable in the analysis of our psychological concepts. In particular, he argues that we can imagine a system that is isomorphic to us under any functional description, but which lacks qualitative mental states, such as pains and color sensations. Whether or not such a being is empirically possible, it certainly seems to be logically possible, or conceptually coherent. Goldman argues from this possibility to the conclusion that our concepts of qualitative mental states cannot be analyzed entirely in functional terms






 
Chalmers, David J. (forthcoming). The two-dimensional argument against materialism. In Brian P. McLaughlin & Sven Walter (eds.), Oxford Handbook to the Philosophy of Mind. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 11 | Google | More links)
Abstract: A number of popular arguments for dualism start from a premise about an epistemic gap between physical truths about truths about consciousness, and infer an ontological gap between physical processes and consciousness. Arguments of this sort include the conceivability argument, the knowledge argument, the explanatory-gap argument, and the property dualism argument. Such arguments are often resisted on the grounds that epistemic premises do not entail ontological conclusion. My view is that one can legitimately infer ontological conclusions from epistemic premises, if one is very careful about how one reasons. To do so, the best way is to reason first from epistemic premises to modal conclusions (about necessity and possibility), and from there to ontological conclusions. Here, the crucial issue is the link between the epistemic and modal domains. How can one reason from theses about what is knowable or conceivable to theses about what is necessary or possible? To bridge the epistemic and modal domains, the framework of two-dimensional semantics can play a central role. I have used this framework in earlier work (Chalmers 1996) to mount an argument against materialism. Here, I want to revisit the argument, laying it out in a more explicit and careful form, and responding to a number of objections. In what follows I will concentrate mostly on the conceivability argument. I think that very similar considerations apply to the other arguments mentioned above, however. In the final section of the paper, I show how this analysis might yield a unified treatment of a number of anti-materialist arguments





 
Chalmers, David (unknown). Zombies on the web. .   (Google)
Abstract: Zombies are hypothetical creatures of the sort that philosophers have been known to cherish. A zombie is physically identical to a normal human being, but completely lacks conscious experience. Zombies look and behave like the conscious beings that we know and love, but "all is dark inside." There is nothing it is like to be a zombie
 
Churchland, Paul M. (2004). Philosophy of mind meets logical theory: Perry on neo-dualism. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 68 (1):199-206.   (Google | More links) 





 
Cohnitz, Daniel (online). The logic of negative conceivability.   (Google)
Abstract: Analytic epistemology is traditionally interested in rational reconstructions of cognitive pro- cesses. The purpose of these rational reconstructions is to make plain how a certain cognitive process might eventually result in knowledge or justi?ed beliefs, etc., if we pre-theoretically think that we have such knowledge or such justi?ed beliefs. Typically a rational reconstruction assumes some (more or less) unproblematic basis of knowledge and some justi?cation-preserving inference pattern and then goes on to show how these two su ce to generate the explicandum
 
Cottrell, Allin (1999). Sniffing the camembert: On the conceivability of zombies. Journal of Consciousness Studies 6:4-12.   (Cited by 13 | Google) 
 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1995). The unimagined preposterousness of zombies. Journal of Consciousness Studies 2 (4):322-26.   (Cited by 37 | Google)
Abstract: Knock-down refutations are rare in philosophy, and unambiguous self-refutations are even rarer, for obvious reasons, but sometimes we get lucky. Sometimes philosophers clutch an insupportable hypothesis to their bosoms and run headlong over the cliff edge. Then, like cartoon characters, they hang there in mid-air, until they notice what they have done and gravity takes over. Just such a boon is the philosophers' concept of a zombie, a strangely attractive notion that sums up, in one leaden lump, almost everything that I think is wrong with current thinking about consciousness. Philosophers ought to have dropped the zombie like a hot potato, but since they persist in their embrace, this gives me a golden opportunity to focus attention on the most seductive error in current thinking
 
Dennett, Daniel C. (2001). The zombic hunch: Extinction of an intuition? In Anthony O'Hear (ed.), Philosophy at the New Millennium. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 14 | Google | More links) 





 
de Quincey, Christian (2000). Conceiving the 'inconceivable'? Journal of Consciousness Studies 7 (4):67-81.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Diaz-Leon, Esa (2008). Defending the phenomenal concept strategy. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 86 (4):597 – 610.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: One of the main strategies against conceivability arguments is the so-called phenomenal concept strategy, which aims to explain the epistemic gap between physical and phenomenal truths in terms of the special features of phenomenal concepts. Daniel Stoljar has recently argued that the phenomenal concept strategy has failed to provide a successful explanation of this epistemic gap. In this paper my aim is to defend the phenomenal concept strategy from his criticisms. I argue that Stoljar has misrepresented the resources of the strategy, which can indeed accomplish the required explanatory task, once it is properly understood





 
Diaz-Leon, Esa, The conceivability argument against behaviourism and the phenomenal concept strategy.   (Google)
Abstract: The phenomenal concept strategy is one of the most attractive responses to the so-called conceivability arguments. A crucial step in these arguments is the inference from conceivability to possibility. The phenomenal concept strategy attacks this inference from conceivability to possibility: they argue that there is an alternative explanation of the conceivability of zombies, which does not involve the possibility of zombies. This alternative explanation appeals to special features of phenomenal concepts in order to explain the conceivability of zombies. Daniel Stoljar has recently argued that if the phenomenal concept strategy was a good strategy against the conceivability argument against physicalism, it would also be a good strategy against the conceivability argument against behaviourism. But he claims that the latter conceivability argument is sound, and therefore the phenomenal concept strategy cannot be correct. In this paper I show how the phenomenal concept strategy can respond to this objection
 
Dietrich, Eric & Gillies, Anthony S. (2001). Consciousness and the limits of our imaginations. Synthese 126 (3):361-381.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 






 
Dietrich, Eric (1998). It only seems as if zombies are logically possible, or how consciousness hides the truth of materialism: A critical review of The Conscious Mind. Minds and Machines 8 (3).   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 






 
Fiocco, M. Oreste (2007). Conceivability and epistemic possibility. Erkenntnis 67 (3).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The notion of conceivability has traditionally been regarded as crucial to an account of modal knowledge. Despite its importance to modal epistemology, there is no received explication of conceivability. In recent discussions, some have attempted to explicate the notion in terms of epistemic possibility. There are, however, two notions of epistemic possibility, a more familiar one and a novel one. I argue that these two notions are independent of one another. Both are irrelevant to an account of modal knowledge on the predominant view of modal reality. Only the novel notion is relevant and apt on the competing view of modal reality; but this latter view is problematic in light of compelling counterexamples. Insufficient care regarding the independent notions of epistemic possibility can lead to two problems: a gross problem of conflation and a more subtle problem of obscuring a crucial fact of modal epistemology. Either problem needlessly hampers efforts to develop an adequate account of modal knowledge. I conclude that the familiar notion of epistemic possibility (and the very term ‘epistemic possibility’) should be eschewed in the context of modal epistemology





 
Fish, William C. (1999). Problems with actual-sequence incompatibilism. Philosophical Writings 12:47-52.   (Google) 
 
Frankish, Keith (2007). The anti-zombie argument. Philosophical Quarterly 57 (229):650–666.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In recent years the 'zombie argument' has come to occupy a central role in the case against physicalist views of consciousness, in large part because of the powerful advocacy it has received from David Chalmers.1 In this paper I seek to neutralize it by showing that a parallel argument can be run for physicalism, an argument turning on the conceivability of what I shall call anti-zombies. I shall argue that the result is a stand-off, and that the zombie argument offers no independent reason to reject physicalism





 
Garrett, Brian Jonathan (2009). Causal essentialism versus the zombie worlds. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 39 (1):pp. 93-112.   (Google) 
 
Geirsson, Heimir (2005). Conceivability and defeasible modal justification. Philosophical Studies 122 (3):279-304.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper advances the thesis that we can justifiably believe philosophically interesting possibility statements. The first part of the paper critically discusses van Inwagens skeptical arguments while at the same time laying some of the foundation for a positive view. The second part of the paper advances a view of conceivability in terms of imaginability, where imaginging can be propositional, pictorial, or a combination of the two, and argues that conceivability can, and often does, provide us with justified beliefs of what is metaphysically possible. The notion of scenarios is developed, as is an account of how filling out scenarios can uncover a defeater or, in many cases, strengthen the justification for the relevant possibility statement







 
Gendler, Tamar S. & Hawthorne, John (eds.) (2002). Conceivability and Possibility. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 40 | Google)
Abstract: The capacity to represent things to ourselves as possible plays a crucial role both in everyday thinking and in philosophical reasoning; this volume offers much-needed philosophical illumination of conceivability, possibility, and the relations between them
 
Gendler, Tamar S. & Hawthorne, John (2002). Introduction: Conceivability and possibility. In T. Genler & John Hawthorne (eds.), Conceivability and Possibility. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 5 | Google)
Abstract: To what extent and how is conceivability a guide to possibility? This essay explores general philosophical issues raised by this question, and critically surveys responses to it by Descartes, Hume, Kripke and "two-dimensionalists."
 
Gertler, Brie (2002). Explanatory reduction, conceptual analysis, and conceivability arguments about the mind. Noûs 36 (1):22-49.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The current stand-off between reductionists and anti-reductionists about the mental has sparked a long-overdue reexamination of key issues in philosophi- cal methodology.1 The resulting debate promises to advance our understand- ing of how empirical discoveries bear on the numerous philosophical problems which involve the analysis or reduction of kinds. The parties to this debate disagree about how, and to what extent, conceptual facts contribute to justify- ing explanatory reductions







 
Goff, Philip (2010). Ghosts and sparse properties: Why physicalists have more to fear from ghosts than zombies. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 81 (1):119-139.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Zombies are bodies without minds: creatures that are physically identical to actual human beings, but which have no conscious experience. Much of the consciousness literature focuses on considering how threatening philosophical reflection on such creatures is to physicalism. There is not much attention given to the converse possibility, the possibility of minds without bodies, that is, creatures who are conscious but whose nature is exhausted by their being conscious. We can call such a ‘purely conscious’ creature a ghost






 
Goff, Philip (2007). Kirk on empirical physicalism - discussion. Ratio 20 (1):122-129.   (Google | More links) 




 
Guzeldere, Guven (1995). Varieties of zombiehood. Journal of Consciousness Studies 2 (4):326-33.   (Cited by 10 | Google) 
 
Hanrahan, Rebecca Roman (2009). Consciousness and modal empiricism. Philosophia 37 (2).   (Google)
Abstract: David Chalmers supports his contention that there is a possible world populated by our zombie twins by arguing for the assumption that conceivability entails possibility. But, I argue, the modal epistemology he sets forth, ‘modal rationalism,’ ignores the problem of incompleteness and relies on an idealized notion of conceivability. As a consequence, this epistemology can’t justify our quotidian judgments of possibility, let alone those judgments that concern the mind/body connection. Working from the analogy that the imagination is to the possible as perception is to the actual, I set forth a competing epistemology, ‘modal empiricism.’ This epistemology survives the incompleteness objection and allows some of our everyday modal judgments to be justified. But this epistemology can’t justify the claim that Zombie World is possible, which leaves Chalmers’s property dualism without the support it needs
 
Handrahan, Rebecca (2005). Epistemology and possibility. Dialogue 44 (4):627-652.   (Google) 
 
Harnad, Stevan (1994). Guest editorial: Why and how we are not zombies. Journal of Consciousness Studies 1 (2):164-167.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Harnad, Stevan (1994). Why and how we are not zombies. Journal of Consciousness Studies 1:164-67.   (Cited by 65 | Google | More links)
Abstract: A robot that is functionally indistinguishable from us may or may not be a mindless Zombie. There will never be any way to know, yet its functional principles will be as close as we can ever get to explaining the mind
















 
Harnad, Stevan (1995). Why and how we are not zombies. [Journal (Paginated)].   (Google | More links)
Abstract: A robot that is functionally indistinguishable from us may or may not be a mindless Zombie. There will never be any way to know, yet its functional principles will be as close as we can ever get to explaining the mind





 
Hauser, Larry (online). Revenge of the zombies.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: Zombies recently conjured by Searle and others threaten civilized (i.e., materialistic) philosophy of mind and scientific psychology as we know it. Humanoid beings that behave like us and may share our functional organizations and even, perhaps, our neurophysiological makeups without qualetative conscious experiences, zombies seem to meet every materialist condition for thought on offer and yet -- the wonted intuitions go -- are still disqualefied (disqualified for lack of qualia) from being thinking things. I have a plan. Other zombies -- good (qualia eating) zombies -- can battle their evil (behavior eating) cousins to a standoff. Perhaps even defeat them. Familiar zombies and supersmart zombies resist disqualefication, making the world safe, again, for materialism. Behavioristic materialism. Alas for functionalism, good zombies still eat programs. Alas for identity theory, all zombies -- every B movie fan knows -- eat brains
 
Havel, Ivan (1999). Living in conceivable worlds. Foundations of Science 3 (2):375-394.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Certain cognitive and philosophical aspects of the concept of conceivability with intended or established diversion from (putative) reality are discussed. The “coherence gap problem” arises when certain fragments of the real world are replaced with imaginary situations while most details are (intentionally or not) ignored. Another issue, “the spectator problem”, concerns the participation of the conceiver himself in the world conceived. Three different examples of conceivability are used to illustrate our points, namely thought experiments in physics, a hypothetical world devoid of consciousness (zombie world), and virtual reality








 
Hawthorne, John (2002). Advice for physicalists. Philosophical Studies 109 (1):17-52.   (Cited by 10 | Google | More links) 






 
Hill, Christopher S. (1998). Chalmers on the apriority of modal knowledge. Analysis 58 (1):20-26.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 





 
Hill, Christopher S. (1997). Imaginability, conceivability, possibility, and the mind-body problem. Philosophical Studies 87 (1):61-85.   (Cited by 62 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Hill, Christopher S. & Mclaughlin, Brian P. (1999). There are fewer things in reality than are dreamt of in Chalmers's philosophy. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 59 (2):445-454.   (Cited by 43 | Google | More links) 




 
Hodges, Donald C. (1965). Minding, minds and bodies. Pacific Philosophy Forum 3 (February):74-86.   (Google) 
 
Horowitz, Amir (2009). Turning the zombie on its head. Synthese 170 (1).   (Google)
Abstract: This paper suggests a critique of the zombie argument that bypasses the need to decide on the truth of its main premises, and specifically, avoids the need to enter the battlefield of whether conceivability entails metaphysical possibility. It is argued that if we accept, as the zombie argument’s supporters would urge us, the assumption that an ideal reasoner can conceive of a complete physical description of the world without conceiving of qualia, the general principle that conceivability entails metaphysical possibility, and the general principle that for any s and t the metaphysical possibility of s &  − t entails that s does not necessitate t, we have to conclude not that materialism is false but rather that either materialism or the “mental paint” (or “phenomenist”) conception of phenomenality is false. And further, given the initial advantages of materialism, the fact that proponents of the zombie argument are not allowed to rely on arguments against materialism in confronting this dilemma, and difficulties with arguments in favor of phenomenism, we find ourselves pushed to reject the mental paint conception rather than materialism. Or at any rate, it is hard to see how the proponent of the zombie argument can carry the burden of proof that lies with her. Thus, whether or not those premises of the zombie argument are true, the argument fails to refute materialism
 
Huenemann, Charles (2004). The Sage meets the zombie: Spinoza's wise man and Chalmers' The Conscious Mind. Studia Spinozana 14:21-33.   (Google) 
 
Jacobson-Horowitz, Hilla & Horowitz, Amir (2008). Conceivability, higher order patterns, and physicalism. Acta Analytica 23 (4).   (Google) 
 
Johnston, Mark (ms). It necessarily ain't so.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Kallestrup, Jesper (2006). Physicalism, conceivability and strong necessities. Synthese 151 (2):273-295.   (Google | More links) 





 
Kartik, Navin (2000). In the hands of zombies. The Dualist 7 (1):5-19.   (Google) 
 
Kearns, Mike (online). Could Daniel Dennett be a zombie?   (Google) 
 
Kirk, Robert E. (1977). Reply to Don Locke on zombies and materialism. Mind 86 (April):262-4.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Kirk, Robert E. (1974). Sentience and behaviour. Mind 81 (January):43-60.   (Cited by 15 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Kirk, Robert (1999). The inaugural address: Why there couldn't be zombies. Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume 73 (1):1–16.   (Google | More links) 




 
Kirk, Robert (2008). The inconceivability of zombies. Philosophical Studies 139 (1).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: If zombies were conceivable in the sense relevant to the ‘conceivability argument’ against physicalism, a certain epiphenomenalistic conception of consciousness—the ‘e-qualia story’—would also be conceivable. But (it is argued) the e-qualia story is not conceivable because it involves a contradiction. The non-physical ‘e-qualia’ supposedly involved could not perform cognitive processing, which would therefore have to be performed by physical processes; and these could not put anyone into ‘epistemic contact’ with e-qualia, contrary to the e-qualia story. Interactionism does not enable zombists to escape these conclusions





 
Kirk, Robert E. (1999). Why there couldn't be zombies. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 73:1-16.   (Google) 
 
Kirk, Robert E. (online). Zombies. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Kirk, Robert E. (2006). Zombies and Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Zombies and minimal physicalism -- The case for zombies -- Zapping the zombie idea -- What has to be done -- Deciders -- Decision, control, and integration -- De-sophisticating the framework -- Direct activity -- Gap? What gap? -- Survival of the fittest.








 
Kirk, Robert E. (1974). Zombies vs materialists. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 48:135-52.   (Cited by 27 | Annotation | Google)




  
Koch, Christof & Crick, Francis (2001). On the zombie within. Nature 411 (6840):893-893.   (Cited by 22 | Google | More links) 







 
Kraemer, Eric Russert (1980). Imitation-man and the 'new' epiphenomenalism. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 10 (September):479-487.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Kriegel, Uriah (2008). Review of D. Stoljar, Ignorance and Imagination. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 86:515-519.   (Google) 
 
Kung, Peter (online). Imaginability as a guide to possibility.   (Google) 
 
Kupffer, Manfred (online). Conceivability and the A Priori.   (Google) 
 
Lanier, Jaron (1995). You can't argue with a zombie. Journal of Consciousness Studies 2 (4):333-345.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Latham, Noa (1998). Chalmers on the addition of consciousness to the physical world. Philosophical Studies 98 (1):71-97.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links) 






 
Levine, Joseph (1998). Conceivability and the metaphysics of mind. Noûs 32 (4):449-480.   (Cited by 33 | Google | More links) 









 
Levin, Janet (2004). The evidential status of philosophical intuition. Philosophical Studies 121 (3):193-224.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract:   Philosophers have traditionally held that claims about necessities and possibilities are to be evaluated by consulting our philosophical intuitions; that is, those peculiarly compelling deliverances about possibilities that arise from a serious and reflective attempt to conceive of counterexamples to these claims. But many contemporary philosophers, particularly naturalists, argue that intuitions of this sort are unreliable, citing examples of once-intuitive, but now abandoned, philosophical theses, as well as recent psychological studies that seem to establish the general fallibility of intuition.In the first two sections of this paper, I evaluate these arguments, and also the counter-arguments of contemporary defenders of tradition. In the next two sections, I sketch an alternative account of the role of philosophical intuitions that incorporates elements of traditionalism and naturalism - and defend it against other such views. In the final section, however, I discuss intuitions about conscious experience, and acknowledge that my view may not extend comfortably to this case. This may seem unfortunate, since so much contemporary discussion of the epistemology of modality seems motivated by worries about the mind-body problem, and informed by the position one wishes to endorse. But, as I argue, if conscious experience is indeed an exception to the view I suggest in this paper, it is an exception that proves - and can illuminate - the rule






 
Lloyd, Dan (online). Twilight of the zombies.   (Google)
Abstract: A philosophical zombie is a being indistinguishable from an ordinary human in every observable respect, but lacking subjective consciousness. Zombiehood implies *linguistic indiscriminability*, the zombie tendency to talk and even do philosophy of mind in language indiscriminable from ordinary discourse. Zombies thus speak *Zombish*, indistinguishable from English but radically distinct in reference for mental terms. The fate of zombies ultimately depends on whether Zombish can be consistently interpreted. If it can be interpreted consistently, then zombies remain possible, but no test could ever reveal whether anyone (oneself included) is speaking Zombish. Any materialist theory of consciousness is therefore already a theory in Zombish, and is equally confirmable in its human language edition (applicable to humans) and its zombie-language edition (applicable to zombies). On the other hand, if Zombish cannot be consistently interpreted, then the zombies described in Zombish are logically impossible. Either way, the search for a materialistic theory of consciousness should be untroubled by the (possible) zombies among us
 
Loar, Brian (2003). Qualia, properties, modality. Philosophical Issues 1 (1):113-29.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 





 
Locke, Don (1976). Zombies, schizophrenics, and purely physical objects. Mind 83 (January):97-99.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Luis Bermúdez, José (2007). Zombies and consciousness – Robert Kirk. Philosophical Quarterly 57 (227):306–308.   (Google | More links) 




 
Lycan, William G. (2007). Stalnaker on zombies. Philosophical Studies 133 (3):473-479.   (Google | More links) 





 
Lycan, William G. (2003). Vs. a new a priorist argument for dualism. Philosophical Issues 13 (1):130-47.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Back in the late 1950s, a wonderful thing happened to metaphysics








 
Lynch, Michael P. (2006). Zombies and the case of the phenomenal pickpocket. Synthese 149 (1):37-58.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: A prevailing view in contemporary philosophy of mind is that zombies are logically possible. I argue, via a thought experiment, that if this prevailing view is correct, then I could be transformed into a zombie. If I could be transformed into a zombie, then surprisingly, I am not certain that I am conscious. Regrettably, this is not just an idiosyncratic fact about my psychology; I think you are in the same position. This means that we must revise or replace some important positions in the philosophy of mind. We could embrace radical skepticism about our own consciousness, or maintain the complete and total infallibility of our beliefs about our own phenomenal experiences. I argue that we should actually reject the logical possibility of zombies







 
Mandik, Pete (ms). Transcending zombies.   (Google)
Abstract: I develop advice to the reductionist about consciousness in the form of a transcendental argument that depends crucially on the sorts of knowledge claims concerning consciousness that, as crucial elements in the anti-reductionists’ epistemicgap arguments, the anti-reductionist will readily concede. The argument that I develop goes as follows. P1. If I know that I am not a zombie, then phenomenal character is (a certain kind of) conceptualized egocentric content. P2. I know that I am not a zombie. P3. Phenomenal character is (a certain kind of) conceptualized egocentric content. P4. Fixing my physical properties fixes my conceptualized egocentric contents. C. Fixing my physical properties fixes my phenomenal properties
 
Marton, Peter (2000). The murderer returns: A reply on zombies to Jamie Phillips. Southwest Philosophy Review 16 (2):195-200.   (Google) 
 
Marcus, Eric (2004). Why zombies are inconceivable. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 82 (3):477-90.   (Cited by 8 | Google | More links)
Abstract: I argue that zombies are inconceivable. More precisely, I argue that the conceivability-intuition that is used to demonstrate their possibility has been misconstrued. Thought experiments alleged to feature zombies founder on the fact that, on the one hand, they _must_ involve first-person imagining, and yet, on the other hand, _cannot_. Philosophers who take themselves to have imagined zombies have unwittingly conflated imagining a creature who lacks consciousness with imagining a creature without also imagining the consciousness it may or may not possess










 
Marton, Peter (1998). Zombies versus materialists: The battle for conceivability. Southwest Philosophy Review 14 (1):131-138.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Matson, Wallace I. (ms). Logical possibility, laws of nature, and mind in the history of philosophy.   (Google) 
 
Mathieson, Chris (2000). Reining in Chalmers: On the logical possibility of zombies. Canadian Undergraduate Journal of Philosophy.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Matson, Wallace I. (2003). Zombies begone! Against Chalmers' mind/brain dualism. Graduate Faculty Philosophy Journal 24 (1):123-136.   (Google) 
 
McCarthy, John (1995). Todd Moody's zombies. Journal Of Consciousness Studies 2 (4):345-347.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: From the AI point of view, consciousness must be regarded as a collection of interacting processes rather than the unitary object of much philosophical speculation. We ask what kinds of propositions and other entities need to be designed for consciousness to be useful to an animal or a machine. We thereby assert that human consciousness is useful to human functioning and not just and epiphenomenon. Zombies in the sense of Todd Moody's article are merely the victims of Moody's prejudices. To behave like humans, zombies will need what Moody might call pseudo-consciousness, but useful pseudo-consciousness will share all the observable qualities of human consciousness including what the zombie will be able to report. Robots will require a pseudo-consciousness with many of the intellectual qualities of human consciousness but will function successfully with few if any human emotional conscious qualities if that is how we choose to build them












 
Melnyk, Andrew (2001). Physicalism unfalsified: Chalmers' inconclusive argument for dualism. In Carl Gillett & Barry M. Loewer (eds.), Physicalism and its Discontents. Cambridge University Press.   (Google) 
 
Melnyk, Andrew (2001). Physicalism unfalsified, chalmer's inconclusive conceivability argument. In Carl Gillett & Barry M. Loewer (eds.), Physicalism and its Discontents. Cambridge University Press.   (Google) 
 
Menzies, Peter (1998). Possibility and conceivability: A response-dependent account of their connections. In Roberto Casati (ed.), European Review of Philosophy, Volume 3: Response-Dependence. Stanford: CSLI Publications.   (Cited by 7 | Google)
Abstract: In the history of modern philosophy systematic connections were assumed to hold between the modal concepts of logical possibility and necessity and the concept of conceivability. However, in the eyes of many contemporary philosophers, insuperable objections face any attempt to analyze the modal concepts in terms of conceivability. It is important to keep in mind that a philosophical explanation of modality does not have to take the form of a reductive analysis. In this paper I attempt to provide a response-dependent account of the modal concepts in terms of conceivability along the lines of a nonreductive model of explanation
 
Moody, Todd C. (1994). Conversations with zombies. Journal of Consciousness Studies 1 (2):196-200.   (Cited by 31 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Moody, Todd C. (1995). Why zombies won't stay dead. Journal of Consciousness Studies 2 (4):365-372.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Murphy, Peter (2006). Reliability connections between conceivability and inconceivability. Dialectica 60 (2):195-205.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Nagel, Thomas (1998). Conceiving the impossible and the mind-body problem. Philosophy 73 (285):337-52.   (Cited by 22 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Intuitions based on the first-person perspective can easily mislead us about what is and is not conceivable.1 This point is usually made in support of familiar reductionist positions on the mind-body problem, but I believe it can be detached from that approach. It seems to me that the powerful appearance of contingency in the relation between the functioning of the physical organism and the conscious mind -- an appearance that depends directly or indirectly on the first- person perspective -- must be an illusion. But the denial of this contingency should not take the form of a reductionist account of consciousness of the usual type, whereby the logical gap between the mental and the physical is closed by conceptual analysis -- in effect, by analyzing the mental in terms of the physical (however elaborately this is done -- and I count functionalism as such a theory, along with the topic-neutral causal role analyses of mental concepts from which it descends)








 
Nagasawa, Yujin (2008). Zombies and consciousness - by Robert Kirk. Philosophical Books 49 (2):170-171.   (Google) 
 
Onof, Christian J. (2008). Property dualism, epistemic normativity and the limits of naturalism. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 76 (1):60-85.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper examines some consequences of the (quasi-)epiphenomenalism implied by a property dualistic view of phenomenal consciousness. The focus is upon the variation of phenomenal content over time. A thought-experiment is constructed to support two claims. The weaker claim exhibits an incompatibility which arises in certain logically possible situations between a conscious subjecfs epistemicnorms and the requirement that one be aware of one’s conscious experience. This could be interpreted as providing some epistemic grounds for the postulation of bridging laws between the physical/functional and phenomenal domains. The stronger claim has it that the ontology of property dualism is not properly able to account for the certainty I have of being phenomenally conscious. The problem is viewed as resulting from the neglect of the intensional context involved in a proper representation of the argument for property dualism. It is argued that only a transcendental move can do justice to this certainty I have






 
Pereboom, Derk (web). Consciousness and introspective inaccuracy. In L. M. Jorgensen & S. Newlands (eds.), Appearance, Reality, and the Good: Themes From the Philosophy of Robert M. Adams. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Perkins, Moreland (1970). Matter, sensation, and understanding. American Philosophical Quarterly 8:1-12.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google)




  
Perkins, Moreland (1971). Sentience. Journal of Philosophy 68 (June):329-37.   (Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Perry, John (2001). The zombie argument. In Knowledge, Possibility, and Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
Phillips, Jamie L. (1998). A problem with Marton's zombies vs. materialists: The battle for conceivability. Southwest Philosophy Review 14 (2):175-178.   (Google) 
 
Phillips, Jamie L. (1999). Can imagination provide prima facie justification for possibility? A problem for Tye. Southwest Philosophy Review 15 (1):149-156.   (Google) 
 
Phillips, Matthew (ms). Why positive and negative conceivability can't save the conceivability-possibility link.   (Google) 
 
Phillips, Jamie L. (2003). Why you shouldn't believe in zombies (or their friends!). Southwest Philosophy Review 19 (1):231-238.   (Google) 
 
Piccinini, Gualtiero (2008). Access denied to zombies. unpublished.   (Google)
Abstract: According to the zombie conceivability argument, phenomenal zombies are conceivable, and hence possible, and hence physicalism is false. Critics of the conceivability argument have responded by denying either that zombies are conceivable or that they are possible. Much of the controversy hinges on how to establish and understand what is conceivable, what is possible, and the link between the two—matters that are at least as obscure and controversial as whether consciousness is physical. Because of this, the debate over physicalism is unlikely to be resolved by thinking about zombies—or at least, zombies as discussed by philosophers to date.



 In this paper, I explore an alternative strategy against the zombie conceivability argument. I accept the possibility of zombies and ask whether that possibility is accessible (in the sense of ‘accessible’ used in possible world semantics) to our world. It turns out that the question of whether zombie worlds are accessible to our world is equivalent to the question of whether physicalism is true. By assuming that zombie worlds are accessible to our world, supporters of the zombie conceivability argument beg the question against physicalists. I will then consider what happens if a supporter of the zombie conceivability argument should insist that zombie worlds are accessible to our world. I will argue that the same ingredients used in the zombie conceivability argument—whatever they might be—can be used to construct an argument to the opposite conclusion. If that is correct, we reach a stalemate between physicalism and property dualism: while the possibility of some zombies entails property dualism, the possibility of other creatures entails physicalism. Since these two possibilities are inconsistent, one of them is not genuine. To resolve this stalemate, we need more than thought experiments.
 
Polcyn, Karol (2006). Conceivability, possibility, and a posteriori necessity: On Chalmers' argument for dualism. Diametros 7 (March):37-55.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Chalmers argues that zombies are possible and that therefore consciousness does not supervene on physical facts, which shows the falsity of materialism. The crucial step in this argument – that zombies are possible – follows from their conceivability and hence depends on assuming that conceivability implies possibility. But while Chalmers’s defense of this assumption – call it the conceivability principle – is the key part of his argument, it has not been well understood. As I see it, Chalmers’s defense of the conceivability principle comes in his response to the so-called objection from a posteriori necessity. The defense aims at showing that there is no gap between conceivability and possibility since no such gap can be generated by necessary a posteriori truths. I will argue that while Chalmers is right to the extent that there is no gap between conceivability and possibility within the standard Kripkean model of a posteriori necessity, his general conclusion is not justified. This is because the conceivability principle might be inconsistent with a posteriori necessity understood in some non-Kripkean way and Chalmers has not shown that no such alternative understanding of a posteriori necessity is available.





 
Polcyn, Karol (ms). Chalmers' two-dimensional argument against materialism.   (Google) 
 
Polger, Thomas W. (online). Zombies. A Field Guide to the Philosophy of Mind.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Polger, Thomas W. (2000). Zombies explained. In Andrew Brook, Don Ross & David L. Thompson (eds.), Dennett's Philosophy: A Comprehensive Assessment. MIT Press.   (Cited by 8 | Google) 
 
Prudovsky, Gad (1995). Arguments from conceivability. Ratio 8 (1):63-69.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: What can be inferred from the fact that something is, or is not, conceivable? In this paper I argue, contrary to some deflationary remarks in recent literature, that arguments which use such facts as their starting point may have significant philosophical import. I use Strawson's results from the first chapter of "Individuals" in order to show that Galileo's arguments in favor of the distinction between primary and secondary qualities, which are based on premises concerning conceivability, should not be dismissed: they are the first step towards recognizing an important conceptual truth
 
Raymore, Paul (ms). A materialist response to David Chalmers' The Conscious Mind.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Robinson, Howard M. (1976). The mind-body problem in contemporary philosophy. Zygon 11 (December):346-360.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Robb, David (2008). Zombies from Below. In Simone Gozzano Francesco Orilia (ed.), Tropes, Universals, and the Philosophy of Mind: Essays at the Boundary of Ontology and Philosophical Psychology. Ontos Verlag.   (Google)
Abstract: A zombie is a creature just like a conscious being in certain respects, but wholly lacking in consciousness. In this paper, I look at zombies from the perspective of basic ontology (“from below”), taking as my starting point a trope ontology I have defended elsewhere. The consequences of this ontology for zombies are mixed. Viewed from below, one sort of zombie—the exact dispositional zombie—is impossible. A similar argument can be wielded against another sort—the exact physical zombie—but here supplementary principles are needed to get to the impossibility result. Finally, at least two sorts of zombie—the behavioural and functional zombies—escape these arguments from below.
 
Rosenthal, David M. (1968). Intentionality: A study of the views of Chisholm and Sellars. Philosophy.   (Cited by 6 | Google)
Abstract: Edited in hypertext by Andrew Chrucky. Reprinted with the permission of Professor David Rosenthal. Editor's Note: Due to the limitation of current hypertext, the following conventions have been used. In general, if an expression has some mark over it, that mark is placed as a prefix to the expression. All Greek characters (except phi) are rendered by their names. Subscripts are placed in parentheses as concatenated suffixes: thus, e.g., H(2)O is the chemical formula for water. Sellars' dot quotes are expressed by bold periods
 
Rosenthal, David M. & Sellars, Wilfrid S. (1972). The Rosenthal-Sellars correspondence on intentionality. In Ausonio Marras (ed.), Intentionality, Mind and Language. University of Illinois Press.   (Google)
Abstract: In response to your kind offer to read through portions of the typescript of my thesis pertaining to your views on intentionality, I am sending you a copy of an introductory section to such a chapter.{1} The enclosed typescript represents a first draft, for which I apologize, but I thought it might be useful to get any comments you might have in at the ground floor, so to speak
 
Seager, William E. (ms). Are zombies logically possible? -- And why it matters.   (Google)
Abstract: A philosophical zombie is a being physically indistinguishable from an actual or possible human being, inhabiting a possible world where the _physical_ laws are identical to the laws of the actual world, but which completely lacks consciousness. For zombies, all is dark within, and hence they are, at the most fundamental level, utterly different from us. But, given their definition, this singular fact has no direct implications about the kind of motion, or other physical processes, the zombie will undergo within its own world. Under quite standard physicalist assumptions, such as certain assumptions about the 'initial conditions' of the zombie's world and that of the causal closure of the physical
 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1999). On David Chalmers's The Conscious Mind. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 59 (2):439-444.   (Cited by 8 | Google | More links) 




 
Shrader, Warren (online). Assessing the case against a posteriori physicalism.   (Google) 
 
Skokowski, Paul G. (2002). I, zombie. Consciousness and Cognition 11 (1):1-9.   (Cited by 10 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Certain recent philosophical theories offer the prospect that zombies are possible. These theories argue that experiential contents, or qualia, are nonphysical properties. The arguments are based on the conceivability of alternate worlds in which physical laws and properties remain the same, but in which qualia either differ or are absent altogether. This article maintains that qualia are, on the contrary, physical properties in the world. It is shown how, under the burden of the a posteriori identification of qualia with physical properties, a reasoned choice can be made between the two types of theories which ultimately favors materialism and rejects zombies








 
Sleutels, Jan (2006). Greek zombies. Philosophical Psychology 19 (2):177-197.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper explores the possibility that the human mind underwent substantial changes in recent history. Assuming that consciousness is a substantial trait of the mind, the paper focuses on the suggestion made by Julian Jaynes that the Mycenean Greeks had a "bicameral" mind instead of a conscious one. The suggestion is commonly dismissed as patently absurd, for instance by critics such as Ned Block. A closer examination of the intuitions involved, considered from different theoretical angles (social constructivism, idealism, eliminativism, realism), reveals that the idea of 'Greek zombies' should be taken more seriously than is commonly assumed










 
Sommers, Tamler (2002). Of zombies, color scientists, and floating iron bars. Psyche 8.   (Cited by 2 | Google)
Abstract: a logically possible world physically identical to ours, in which the positive facts about consciousness do not hold." First, I analyze the move from conceivability to logical possibility. Following George Seddon, I consider the case of a floating iron bar and argue that even this seemingly conceivable event has implicit logical contradictions in its description. I then show that the distinctions Chalmers employs between primary and secondary intensions, and a priori and a posteriori entailment, break down upon close examination-with iron bars and with consciousness it is impossible to know where primary intensions end and secondary intensions begin. I extend this analysis of logical possibility to the famous zombie thought experiment and conclude not that a zombie world is logically _im_possible, but rather that, at present, the question is open. Finally, I show how a similar line of argument may be used to undermine the "Mary the color scientist" thought experiment as well
 
Squires, Roger (1974). Zombies vs materialists II. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 48:153-63.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Stalnaker, Robert (2007). Stalnaker on zombies (response to lycan). Philosophical Studies 133 (3):481-491.   (Google) 
 
Stalnaker, Robert (2002). What is it like to be a zombie? In Tamar S. Gendler & John Hawthorne (eds.), Conceivability and Possibility. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 12 | Google) 
 
Stoljar, Daniel (2006). Actors and zombies. In Alex Byrne & J. Thomson (eds.), Content and Modalities: Themes From the Philosophy of Robert Stalnaker. Oxford University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: 1. Much of contemporary philosophy of mind is dominated by the intersection of three topics: physicalism, the conceivability argument, and the necessary a posteriori. I will be concerned here (i) to describe (what I take to be) the consensus view of these topics; (ii) to explain why I think this account is mistaken; and (iii) to briefly sketch an alternative
 
Stoljar, Daniel (forthcoming). Review of Perry's Knowledge, Possibility, and Consciousness. Philosophical Quarterly.   (Google)
Abstract: _the subject matter assumption_ . Perry suggests that the subject matter assumption is false
 
Stoljar, Daniel (2001). The conceivability argument and two conceptions of the physical. Philosophical Perspectives 15:393-413.   (Cited by 9 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The conceivability argument (CA) against physicalism1 starts from the prem- ises that: (1) It is conceivable that I have a zombie-twin, i.e., that there is someone who is physically identical to me and yet who lacks phenomenal con- sciousness; and (2) If it is conceivable that I have a zombie-twin, then it is possible that I have a zombie-twin. These premises entail that physicalism is false, for physicalism is the claim—or can be assumed for our purposes to be the claim2—that








 
Stoljar, Daniel (2007). Two conceivability arguments compared. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 107.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The conclusion of this argument (hereafter ZA) entails the falsity of physicalism because, technical details aside, physicalism is or entails the thesis that every psychological truth is entailed by some physical truth. If it is possible that I have a zombie duplicate however, then it is possible that the physical truths are as they are and some psychological truth is different. Hence 3 entails that physicalism is false. The second conceivability argument is one that is almost as famous, though perhaps it is less famous for being a conceivability argument: the perfect actor argument against behaviorism (see, e.g., Putnam 1963, 1975). In a version that is both familiar and relatively clear, it goes like this





 
Tanney, Julia (2004). On the conceptual, psychological, and moral status of zombies, swamp-beings, and other 'behaviourally indistinguishable' creatures. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 69 (1):173-186.   (Google | More links) 




 
Thomas, Nigel J. T. (1998). Zombie killer. In Stuart R. Hameroff, Alfred W. Kaszniak & A. C. Scott (eds.), Toward a Science of Consciousness II. MIT Press.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Philosopher's zombies are hypothetical beings behaviorally, functionally, and perhaps even physically indistinguishable from normal humans, but who lack our consciousness. Many people seem to be convinced that such zombies are a real conceptual possibility, and that this bare possibility entails that understanding human consciousness must remain forever beyond the reach of science. However, the conceptual entailments of zombiehood have not been sufficiently examined. This brief article shows that any way of understanding the behavior of zombies that does in fact support the suggested entailment, leads to contradictions and absurdities. Zombies are _not_ conceptually possible





 
Unwin, Nicholas (ms). Expressivism and the Metaphysics of Consciousness.   (Google)
Abstract: An expressivist theory of consciousness is outlined. The suggestion that attributions of consciousness involve an essentially projective element is carefully examined, as is the view that ‘zombism’, defined as the thought that certain people are unconscious although physically normal, is a largely affective and not wholly cognitive (hypothetical) disorder. A comparison is drawn between ‘zombism’ and the Capgras delusion. The notion of supervenience is shown to be deeply problematic when applied to projected properties, as is the distinction between weak and strong varieties. It is concluded that, contrary to most received opinion, consciousness and values are not all that different as far as these modal considerations are concerned.
 
Vahid, Hamid (2006). Conceivability and possibility: Chalmers on modal epistemology. Philosophical Explorations 9 (3):243-260.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: We often decide whether a state of affairs is possible (impossible) by trying to mentally depict a scenario (using words, images, etc.) where the state in question obtains (or fails to obtain). These mental acts (broadly thought of as 'conceiving') seem to provide us with an epistemic route to the space of possibilities. The problem this raises is whether conceivability judgments provide justification-conferring grounds for the ensuing possibility-claims (call this the 'conceivability thesis'). Although the question has a long history, contemporary interest in it was, to a large extent, prompted by Kripke's utilization of modal intuitions in the course of propounding certain influential theses in the philosophy of language and mind. The interest has been given a further boost by the recent two-dimensional approach to the Kripkean framework. In this paper, I begin by providing a detailed examination of a most recent attempt (due to Chalmers) to defend the thesis and argue that it is unsuccessful. This is followed by presenting my own gloss on Kripke's explanation of the illusions of contingency and I close by raising a general problem intended to undermine the prospects for a successful defense of the thesis.








 
van Gulick, Robert (1999). Conceiving beyond our means: The limits of thought experiments. In Stuart R. Hameroff, Alfred W. Kaszniak & David J. Chalmers (eds.), Toward a Science of Consciousness III. MIT Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Vierkant, Tillmann (2002). Zombie Mary and the blue banana. On the compatibility of the 'knowledge argument' with the argument from modality. Psyche 8 (19).   (Google) 
 
Walde, Bettina (2005). On epistemic and ontological aspects of consciousness: Modal arguments and their possible implications. Mind and Matter 3 (2):103-115.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Anti-materialist thought experiments as, e.g., zombie arguments, have posed some of the most vexing problems for materialist accounts of phenomenal consciousness. I doubt, however, that arguments of this kind can refute the core thesis of materialism. Although I do not question that there is something very special about an adequate explanation of phenomenal consciousness, and although I accept the epistemic irreducibility of phenomenal consciousness, I deny that modal arguments reach far enough to establish essentialism about consciousness. I will draw upon a relativistic conception of modal space and suggest to strictly separate between varieties of metaphysical possibility - depending on which world is considered as actual, and depending on accessibility relations. It is shown that the modal argument cannot endanger the reductive explanation of the mind-brain relation if one distinguishes carefully between possibility according to primary intensions (epistemic possibility) and possibility according to secondary intensions (meta-physical possibility). Modal arguments are strong enough to make an epistemological point but not an ontological one





 
Weatherson, Brian (ms). Morality in fiction and consciousness in imagination.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Webster, W. R. (2006). Human zombies are metaphysically impossible. Synthese 151 (2):297-310.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Chalmers (The Conscious Mind, Oxford Unversity Press, Oxford 1996) has argued for a form of property dualism on the basis of the concept of a zombie (which is physically identical to normals), and the concept of the inverted spectrum. He asserts that these concepts show that the facts about consciousness, such as experience or qualia, are really further facts about our world, over and above the physical facts. He claims that they are the hard part of the mind-body issue. He also claims that consciousness is a fundamental feature of the world like mass, charge, etc. He says that consciousness does not logically supervene on the physical and all current attempts to assert an identity between consciousness and the physical are just as non-reductive as his dualism. They are simply correlations and are part of the problem of the explanatory gap. In this paper, three examples of strong identities between a sensation or a quale and a physiological process are presented, which overcome these problems. They explain the identity in an a priori manner and they show that consciousness or sensations (Q) logically supervene on the physical (P), in that it is logically impossible to have P and not to have Q. In each case, the sensation was predicted and entailed by the physical. The inverted spectrum problem for consciousness is overcome and explained by a striking asymmetry in colour space. It is concluded that as some physical properties realize some sensations or qualia that human zombies are not metaphysically possible and the explanatory gap is bridged in these cases. Thus, the hard problem is overcome in these instances





 
Worley, Sara (2003). Conceivability, possibility and physicalism. Analysis 63 (1):15-23.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links) 




 
Yablo, Stephen (1999). Concepts and consciousness. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 59 (2):455-463.   (Cited by 30 | Google | More links) 





 
Yablo, Stephen (2002). Coulda, woulda, shoulda. In Tamar S. Gendler & John Hawthorne (eds.), Conceivability and Possibility. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 24 | Google | More links) 




 
Yablo, Stephen (ms). No Fool's Cold: Notes on Illusions of Possibility.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Yablo, Stephen (online). Modal rationalism and logical empiricism: Some similarities.   (Google) 
 
Yablo, Stephen (1998). Textbook kripkeanism and the open texture of language. Philosophical Quarterly 48 (1):98-122.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
1.3c Kripke's Modal Argument




Barnette, R. L. (1977). Kripke's pains. Southern Journal of Philosophy 15:3-14.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Bayne, Steven R. (1988). Kripke's cartesian argument. Philosophia 18 (July):265-270.   (Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Bealer, George (1994). Mental properties. Journal of Philosophy 91 (4):185-208.   (Cited by 21 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: It is argued that, because of scientific essentialism, two currently popular arguments against the mind-body identity thesis -- the multiple-realizability argument and the Nagel-Jackson knowledge argument -- are unsatisfactory as they stand and that their problems are incurable. It is then argued that a refutation of the identity thesis in its full generality can be achieved by weaving together two traditional Cartesian arguments -- the modal argument and the certainty argument. This argument establishes, not just the falsity of the identity thesis, but also the metaphysical possibility of disembodiment







 
Bealer, George (2004). The origins of modal error. Dialectica 58 (1):11-42.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Modal intuitions are the primary source of modal knowledge but also of modal error. According to the theory of modal error in this paper, modal intuitions retain their evidential force in spite of their fallibility, and erroneous modal intuitions are in principle identifiable and eliminable by subjecting our intuitions to a priori dialectic. After an inventory of standard sources of modal error, two further sources are examined in detail. The first source - namely, the failure to distinguish between metaphysical possibility and various kinds of epistemic possibility - turns out to be comparatively easy to untangle and poses little threat to intuition-driven philosophical investigation. The second source is the local (i.e., temporary) misunderstanding of one's concepts (as opposed to outright Burgean misunderstanding). This pathology may be understood on analogy with a patient who is given a clean bill of health at his annual check-up, despite his having a cold at the time of the check-up: although the patient's health is locally (temporarily) disrupted, his overall health is sufficiently good to enable him to overcome the cold without external intervention. Even when our understanding of certain pivotal concepts has lapsed locally, our larger body of intuitions is sufficiently reliable to allow us, without intervention, to ferret out the modal errors resulting from this lapse of understanding by means of dialectic and/or a process of a priori reflection. This source of modal error, and our capacity to overcome it, has wide-ranging implications for philosophical method - including, in particular, its promise for disarming skepticism about the classical method of intuition-driven investigation itself. Indeed, it is shown that skeptical accounts of modal error (e.g., the accounts given by Hill, Levin, and several others) are ultimately self-defeating






 
Blum, Alex (1989). Bayne on Kripke. Philosophia 19 (4):455-456.   (Google | More links) 





 
Blumenfeld, J-B. (1975). Kripke's refutation of materialism. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 53 (April):151-6.   (Annotation | Google | More links)




 






 
Boyd, Robert (1980). Materialism without reductionism: What physicalism does not entail. In Ned Block (ed.), Readings in the Philosophy of Psychology. , Vol 1.   (Cited by 43 | Annotation | Google)




  
Byrne, Alex (2007). Possibility and imagination. Philosophical Perspectives 21 (1):125–144.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: forthcoming in Philosophical Perspectives





 
Carney, James D. (1975). Kripke and materialism. Philosophical Studies 27 (April):279-282.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Carney, James D. & von Bretzel, P. (1973). Modern materialism and essentialism. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 51 (May):78-81.   (Annotation | Google | More links)




 







 
Double, Richard (1981). On a Wittgensteinian objection to Kripke's dualism argument. Philosophy Research Archives 1414.   (Google) 
 
Double, Richard (1976). The inconclusiveness of Kripke's argument against the identity theory. Auslegung 3 (June):156-65.   (Google) 
 
Feldman, Fred (1980). Identity, necessity, and events. In Ned Block (ed.), Readings in the Philosophy of Psychology. , Vol.   (Cited by 4 | Annotation | Google)




  
Feldman, Fred (1973). Kripke's argument against materialism. Philosophical Studies 24 (November):416-19.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Feldman, Fred (1974). Kripke on the identity theory. Journal of Philosophy 71 (October):665-76.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Gjelsvik, Olav (1988). A Kripkean objection to Kripke's arguments against the identity-theories. Inquiry 30 (December):435-50.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google)




  
Hanks, Peter, Conceiving of pain.   (Google)
Abstract: Kripke’s modal argument against the mind-body identity thesis is by now familiar (Kripke 1980): 1. It is possible for there to be pain without C-fiber stimulation, and vice versa.1 2. If pain = C-fiber stimulation, then it is not possible for there to be pain without..
 
Hill, Christopher S. (1981). Why cartesian intuitions are compatible with the identity thesis. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 42 (December):254-65.   (Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Holman, Emmett L. (1988). Qualia, Kripkean arguments, and subjectivity. Philosophy Research Archives 13:411-29.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Jackson, Frank (1980). A note on physicalism and heat. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 58 (March):26-34.   (Cited by 5 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 






 
Jacquette, Dale (1987). Kripke and the mind-body problem. Dialectica 41:293-300.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Kripke, Saul A. (1971). Identity and necessity. In Milton K. Munitz (ed.), Identity and Individuation. New York University Press.   (Cited by 136 | Annotation | Google)




  
Kripke, Saul A. (1980). Naming and Necessity. Harvard University Press.   (Cited by 2621 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Leplin, Jarrett (1979). Theoretical identification and the mind-body problem. Philosophia 8 (October):673-88.   (Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Levin, Michael E. (1975). Kripke's argument against the identity thesis. Journal of Philosophy 72 (March):149-67.   (Cited by 7 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Levin, Michael E. (1995). Tortuous dualism. Journal of Philosophy 92 (6):313-22.   (Cited by 4 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Ludwig, Pascal (ms). Kripke's conceivability argument reconsidered.   (Google) 
 
Lycan, William G. (1987). Functionalism and essence. In William G. Lycan (ed.), Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Lycan, William G. (1974). Kripke and the materialists. Journal of Philosophy 71 (October):677-89.   (Cited by 4 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Malcolm, Norman (1980). Kripke on heat and sensations of heat. Philosophical Investigations 3:12-20.   (Google) 
 
Maxwell, Grover (1979). Rigid designators and mind-brain identity. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science 9.   (Cited by 20 | Annotation | Google)




  
McGinn, Colin (1977). Anomalous monism and Kripke's cartesian intuitions. Analysis 2 (January):78-80.   (Cited by 11 | Annotation | Google)




  
McGinn, Colin (1978). Reply to Woodfield's identity theories and the argument from epistemic counterparts. Analysis 38 (June):144-146.   (Google) 
 
McMullen, C. (1984). An argument against the identity theory. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 65:277-87.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Merrell, Don A. (2006). Theoretical identity, reference fixing, and Boyd's defense of type materialism. Philosophia 34 (2).   (Google | More links) 




 
Merrell, Don A. (2005). Token physicalism is not immune to Kripke's essentialist anti-physicalist argument. Philosophia 32 (1-4):383-388.   (Google | More links) 




 
Mucciolo, Laurence F. (1975). On Kripke's argument against the identity thesis. Philosophia 5 (October):499-506.   (Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Nogaret, T.; Robertson, C. & Rodney, D. (2007). Atomic-scale plasticity in the presence of Frank loops. Philosophical Magazine 87 (6):945-966.   (Google) 
 
Papineau, David (2007). Kripke's proof is ad hominem not two-dimensional. Philosophical Perspectives 21 (1):475–494.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Identity theorists make claims like ‘pain = C-fibre stimulation’. These claims must be necessary if true, given that terms like ‘pain’ and ‘C-fibre stimulation’ are rigid. Yet there is no doubt that such claims appear contingent. It certainly seems that there could have been C-fibre stimulation without pains or vice versa. So identity theorists owe us an explanation of why such claims should appear contingent if they are in fact necessary






 
Papineau, David (online). Kripke's proof that we are all intuitive dualists.   (Google) 
 
Perry, John (2001). The modal argument. In Knowledge, Possibility, and Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
Polger, Thomas W. (online). Kripke and the illusion of contingent identity.   (Google | More links) 




 
Rocca Della, M. (1993). Kripke's essentialist arguments against the identity theory. Philosophical Studies 69 (1):101-112.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Sher, George A. (1977). Kripke, cartesian intuitions, and materialism. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 7:227-38.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Taylor, Paul (1983). McGinn, token physicalism, and a rejoinder of Woodfield. Analysis 43 (March):80-83.   (Google) 
 
Woodfield, Andrew (1978). Identity theories and the argument from epistemic counterparts. Analysis 38 (June):140-3.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Woodfield, Andrew (1978). Rejoinder to McGinn. Analysis 38 (October):201-203.   (Google) 
 
Wright, C. (2002). The conceivability of naturalism. In Tamar S. Gendler (ed.), Conceivability and Possibility. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
1.3d Arguments from Disembodiment




Almog, J. (2005). 'What am I?' Descartes and the mind-body problem - reply. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 70 (3):717-734.   (Google) 
 
Alston, William P. & Smythe, Thomas W. (1994). Swinburne's argument for dualism. Faith and Philosophy 11 (1):127-33.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Blose, B. L. (1981). Materialism and disembodied minds. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 42 (September):59-74.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 





 
Burwood, Stephen (2008). The apparent truth of dualism and the uncanny body. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 7 (2).   (Google)
Abstract: It has been suggested that our experiences of embodiment in general appear to constitute an experiential ground for dualist philosophy and that this is particularly so with experiences of dissociation, in which one feels estranged from one’s body. Thus, Drew Leder argues that these play “a crucial role in encouraging and supporting Cartesian dualism” as they “seem to support the doctrine of an immaterial mind trapped inside an alien body”. In this paper I argue that as dualism does not capture the character of such experiences there is not even an apparent separation of self and body revealed here and that one’s body is experienced as uncanny rather than alien. The general relationship between our philosophical theorizing and the phenomenology of lived experience is also considered
 
Carrier, L. (1974). Definitions and disembodied minds. Personalist Forum 55:334-43.   (Google) 
 
Cole, David J. & Foelber, F. (1984). Contingent materialism. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 65:74-85.   (Cited by 9 | Annotation | Google)




  
Corcoran, Kevin J. (1998). Persons and bodies. Faith and Philosophy 15 (3):324-340.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Englebretsen, George F. (1972). Armstrong on disembodied minds. Dialogue 11 (December):576-579.   (Google) 
 
Englebretsen, George F. (1974). More on disembodied minds. Philosophical Papers 3 (May):48-50.   (Google) 
 
Estes, David (2006). Evidence for early dualism and a more direct path to afterlife beliefs. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 29 (5):470-+.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Ample evidence for dualism in early childhood already exists. Young children have explicit knowledge of the distinction between mental and physical phenomena, which provides the foundation for a rapidly developing theory of mind. Belief in psychological immortality might then follow naturally from this mentalistic conception of human existence and thus require no organized cognitive system dedicated to producing it







 
Everitt, Nicholas (2000). Substance dualism and disembodied existence. Faith and Philosophy 17 (3):333-347.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 




 
Gillett, Grant R. (1986). Disembodied persons. Philosophy 61 (July):377-386.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Goetz, Stewart C. (2001). Modal dualism: A critique. In Kevin J. Corcoran (ed.), Soul, Body, and Survival: Essays on the Metaphysics of Human Persons. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Goff, Philip (2010). Ghosts and sparse properties: Why physicalists have more to fear from ghosts than zombies. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 81 (1):119-139.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Zombies are bodies without minds: creatures that are physically identical to actual human beings, but which have no conscious experience. Much of the consciousness literature focuses on considering how threatening philosophical reflection on such creatures is to physicalism. There is not much attention given to the converse possibility, the possibility of minds without bodies, that is, creatures who are conscious but whose nature is exhausted by their being conscious. We can call such a ‘purely conscious’ creature a ghost






 
Hart, William D. (1988). The Engines of the Soul. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 26 | Google) 
 
Hocutt, Max O. (1974). Armstrong and Strawson on 'disembodied existence'. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 35 (September):46-59.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 






 
Jaeger, Robert A. (1978). Brain/body dualism. Philosophical Studies 34 (November):427-435.   (Google | More links) 




 
Jones, J. (2004). Cartesian conceivings. Metaphysica 5 (1):135-50.   (Google) 
 
Lewy, C. (1943). Is the notion of disembodied existence self-contradictory? Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 43:59-78.   (Google) 
 
Long, Douglas C. (1969). Descartes' argument for mind-body dualism. Philosophical Forum 1:259-273.   (Google)
Abstract: [p. 259] After establishing his own existence by the Cogito argument, Descartes inquires into the nature of the self that he claims to know with certainty to exist. He concludes that he is a res cogitans, an unextended entity whose essence is to be conscious. Although a considerable amount of critical effort has been expended in attempts to show how he thought he could move to this important conclusion, his reasoning has remained quite unconvincing. In particular, his critics have insisted, and I think quite rightly, that his claim to be "entirely and absolutely distinct"[i] from his body is not justified by the reasoning which he offers in its support.[ii] Nevertheless, I also believe that the proffered criticisms of Descartes
 
Long, Douglas C. (1977). Disembodied existence, physicalism, and the mind-body problem. Philosophical Studies 31 (May):307-316.   (Google | More links) 





 
Merricks, Trenton (1994). A new objection to A Priori arguments for dualism. American Philosophical Quarterly 31 (1):81-85.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google)




  
Odegard, Douglas (1970). Disembodied existence and central state materialism. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 48 (August):256-60.   (Google | More links) 







 
Pecnjak, D. (1995). Remarks on disembodied existence. Acta Analytica 10 (13):209-13.   (Google) 
 
Plantinga, Alvin (2006). Against materialism. Faith and Philosophy 23 (1):3-32.   (Google) 
 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1983). On an argument for dualism. In Carl A. Ginet & Sydney Shoemaker (eds.), Knowledge and Mind: Philosophical Essays. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Smart, Brian J. (1971). Can disembodied persons be spatially located? Analysis 31 (March):133-138.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Smythe, Thomas W. (1989). Disembodied minds and personal identity. Philosophy Research Archives 14:415-423.   (Google) 
 
Spieler, David A. (1974). Central state materialism, dualism, and disembodied existence. Personalist 55:354-355.   (Google) 
 
Strawson, Galen (2006). Panpsychism? Reply to commentators with a celebration of Descartes. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11):184-280.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 




 
Stump, Eleonore & Kretzmann, Norman (1996). An objection to Swinburne's argument for dualism. Faith and Philosophy 13 (3):405-412.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Swinburne, Richard (1997). The modal argument for substance dualism. In The Evolution of the Soul. (Revised Edition).   (Google) 
 
Taliaferro, Charles (1986). A modal argument for dualism. Southern Journal of Philosophy 24:95-108.   (Google) 
 
Taliaferro, Charles (1997). Possibilities in the philosophy of mind. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 57 (1):127-37.   (Google | More links) 





 
Tidman, Paul (1994). Conceivability as a test for possibility. American Philosophical Quarterly 31 (4):297-309.   (Cited by 13 | Google) 
 
Tye, Michael (1983). On the possibility of disembodied existence. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 61 (September):275-282.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 








 
van Cleve, James (1983). Conceivability and the cartesian argument for dualism. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 64 (January):35-45.   (Cited by 13 | Google) 
 
Yablo, Stephen (1993). Is conceivability a guide to possibility? Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 53 (1):1-42.   (Cited by 66 | Google | More links) 










 
Zimmerman, D. (1991). Two cartesian arguments for the simplicity of the soul. American Philosophical Quarterly 28 (July):127-37.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
1.3e Other Anti-Materialist Arguments




Bealer, George (1994). The rejection of the identity thesis. In The Mind-Body Problem: A Guide to the Current Debate. Cambridge: Blackwell.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Block, Ned (2006). Max Black's objection to mind-body identity. Oxford Review of Metaphysics 3.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links)
Abstract: considered an objection (Objection 3) that he says he thought was first put to him by Max Black. He says







 
Botterell, Andrew (2003). The property dualism argument against physicalism. Journal of Philosophical Research 28:223-242.   (Google) 
 
Clapp, Leonard J. (1997). Senses, sensations and brain processes: A criticism of the property dualism argument. Southwest Philosophy Review 14 (1):139-148.   (Google) 
 
Double, Richard (1983). Nagel's argument that mental properties are nonphysical. Philosophy Research Archives 9:217-22.   (Google) 
 
Göcke, Benedikt Paul (2008). Physicalism quaerens intellectum. Philosophical Forum 39 (4):463-468.   (Google) 
 
Gertler, Brie (2006). Consciousness and Qualia Cannot Be Reduced. In Robert J. Stainton (ed.), Contemporary Debates in Cognitive Science (Contemporary Debates in Philosophy). Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Goldstein, Irwin (1994). Identifying mental states: A celebrated hypothesis refuted. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 72 (1):46-62.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: Functionalists think an event's causes and effects, its 'causal role', determines whether it is a mental state and, if so, which kind. Functionalists see this causal role principle as supporting their orthodox materialism, their commitment to the neuroscientist's ontology. I examine and refute the functionalist's causal principle and the orthodox materialism that attends that principle.










 
Goldstein, Laurence (1980). The reasons of a materialist. Philosophy 55 (April):249-252.   (Google) 
 
Hasker, William (2003). How not to be a reductivist. Progress in Complexity, Information, and Design 2.   (Google | More links) 










 
Kelly, J. S. (1989). On neutralizing introspection: The data of sensuous awareness. Southern Journal of Philosophy 27:29-53.   (Google) 
 
Lahav, Ran (1994). A new challenge for the physicalist: Phenomenal indistinguishabilty. Philosophia 24 (1-2):77-103.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Levine, Joe (2007). Anti-materialist arguments and influential replies. In Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Lycan, William G. (2006). Consciousness and Qualia Can Be Reduced. In Robert J. Stainton (ed.), Contemporary Debates in Cognitive Science (Contemporary Debates in Philosophy). Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Madell, Geoffrey C. (1988). Mind and Materialism. Edinburgh University Press.   (Cited by 10 | Annotation | Google)




  
Madell, Geoffrey C. (2003). Materialism and the first person. In Anthony O'Hear (ed.), Minds and Persons. Cambridge University Press.   (Google) 
 
Maxwell, Nicholas (1968). Understanding sensations. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 46 (August):127-146.   (Cited by 10 | Google | More links) 







 
McGinn, Colin (2001). What is it not like to be a brain? In P. Van Loocke (ed.), The Physical Nature of Consciousness. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
McKinsey, Michael (2005). A refutation of qualia physicalism. In Michael O'Rourke & Corey G. Washington (eds.), Situating Semantics: Essays on the Philosophy of John Perry. MIT Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Mijuskovic, Ben L. (1976). The simplicity argument versus a materialist theory of consciousness. Philosophy Today 20:292-305.   (Google) 
 
Nida-Rumelin, Martine (2004). Phenomenal essentialism: A problem for identity theorists. In Ralph Schumacher (ed.), Perception and Reality: From Descartes to the Present. Mentis.   (Google) 
 
Pautz, Adam (2010). A Simple View of Consciousness. In Bealer and Koons (ed.), The Waning of Materialism. Oxford.   (Google)
Abstract: Phenomenal intentionality is irreducible. Empirical investigation shows it is internally-dependent. So our usual externalist (causal, etc.) theories do not apply here. Internalist views of phenomenal intentionality (e. g. interpretationism) also fail. The resulting primitivist view avoids Papineau's worry that terms for consciousness are highly indeterminate: since conscious properties are extremely natural (despite having unnatural supervenience bases) they are 'reference magnets'.
 
Pautz, Adam (forthcoming). Do Theories of Consciousness Rest on a Mistake? Philosophical Issues 20.   (Google)
Abstract: Using empirical research on pain, sound and taste, I argue against the combination of intentionalism about consciousness and a broadly ‘tracking’ psychosemantics of the kind defended by Fodor, Dretske, Hill, Neander, Stalnaker, Tye and others. Then I develop problems with Kriegel and Prinz's attempt to combine a Dretskean psychosemantics with the view that sensible properties are Shoemakerian response-dependent properties. Finally, I develop in detail my own 'primitivist' view of sensory intentionality.
 
Pautz, Adam (online). Is physicalism simpler than dualism?   (Google)
Abstract: The problems with Physicalism that have most exercised its defenders are
 
Pautz, Adam (ms). The relational structure of sensory consciousness and the mind-body problem.   (Google)
Abstract: I am going to develop an argument against Physicalism concerning qualitative mental properties. Unlike most arguments against Physicalism, it is not based on the usual a priori considerations, such as what Mary learns when she comes out of her black and white room or the apparent conceivability of Zombies. Rather, it is based on two broadly a posteriori premises about the structure of experience and its physical basis
 
Perry, John (2006). Mary and Max and jack and Ned. In Dean W. Zimmerman (ed.), Oxford Studies in Metaphysics, Volume 2. Oxford: Clarendon Press.   (Google) 
 
Perry, John (2004). Pr. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 68 (1):172-181.   (Google | More links) 




 
Perry, John (2004). Replies. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 68 (1):207-229.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 






 
Robinson, Howard M. (1982). Matter and Sense: A Critique of Contemporary Materialism. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 25 | Google) 
 
Robinson, Howard M. (ed.) (1993). Objections to Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 15 | Annotation | Google)





Abstract: Physicalism has, over the past twenty years, become almost an orthodoxy, especially in the philosophy of mind. Many philosophers, however, feel uneasy about this development, and this volume is intended as a collective response to it. Together these papers, written by philosophers from Britain, the United States, and Australasia, show that physicalism faces enormous problems in every area in which it is discussed. The contributors not only investigate the well-known difficulties that physicalism has in accommodating sensory consciousness, but also bring out its inadequacies in dealing with thought, intentionality, abstract objects, (such as numbers), and principles of both theoretical and practical reason; even its ability to cope with the physical world itself is called into question. Both strong "reductionist" versions and weaker "supervenience" theories are discussed and found to face different but equally formidable obstacles. Contributors include George Bealer, Peter Forrest, John Foster, Grant Gillett, Bob Hale, Michael Lockwood, George Myro, Nicholas Nathan, David Smith, Steven Wagner, Ralph Walker, and Richard Warner
 
Rosenberg, Gregg H. (2004). The argument against physicalism. In Gregg H. Rosenberg (ed.), A Place for Consciousness. Oup.   (Google) 
 
Sellars, Roy Wood (1922). Is consciousness physical? Journal of Philosophy 19 (25):690-694.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 





 
Sellars, Wilfrid S. (1981). Is consciousness physical? The Monist 64 (January):66-90.   (Cited by 4 | Annotation | Google)




  
Smith, A. D. (1993). Non-reductive physicalism? In Howard M. Robinson (ed.), Objections to Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 5 | Annotation | Google)




  
Stoljar, Daniel (2000). Physicalism and the necessary A Posteriori. Journal of Philosophy 97 (1):33-55.   (Cited by 17 | Google | More links) 





 
Stoljar, Daniel (forthcoming). The argument from revelation. In Robert Nola & David Braddon Mitchell (eds.), Conceptual Analysis and Philosophical Naturalism. MIT Press.   (Google)
Abstract: 1. Introduction The story of Canberra, the capital of Australia, is roughly as follows. In 1901, when what is called
 
Sturgeon, Scott (1999). Conceptual gaps and odd possibilities. Mind 108 (430):377-380.   (Google | More links) 





 
Velmans, Max (1998). Goodbye to reductionism: Complementary first and third-person approaches to consciousness. In Stuart R. Hameroff, Alfred W. Kaszniak & A. C. Scott (eds.), Toward a Science of Consciousness II. MIT Press.   (Cited by 15 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This chapter argues that dualist vs. reductionist debates adopt an implicit description of consciousness that does not resemble ordinary experience. If one adopts an accurate description of conscious phenomenology along with an understanding of the fundamental differences between correlation, causation and ontological identity, reductionism cannot succeed. However the alternative is not a dualism that places consciousness beyond science. Rather, it is a nonreductionist science of consciousness.










 
Walker, Ralph (1996). Transcendental arguments against physicalism. In Howard M. Robinson (ed.), Objections to Physicalism. New York: Clarendon Press.   (Google) 
 
White, Stephen L. (2002). Why the property dualism argument won't go away. Journal of Philosophy.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
1.3f Consciousness and Materialism, Misc




Alter, Torin & Walter, Sven (eds.) (2007). Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links)
Abstract: What is the nature of consciousness? How is consciousness related to brain processes? This volume collects thirteen new papers on these topics: twelve by leading and respected philosophers and one by a leading color-vision scientist. All focus on consciousness in the "phenomenal" sense: on what it's like to have an experience. Consciousness has long been regarded as the biggest stumbling block for physicalism, the view that the mind is physical. The controversy has gained focus over the last few decades, and phenomenal knowledge and phenomenal concepts--knowledge of consciousness and the associated concepts--have come to play increasingly prominent roles in this debate. Consider Frank Jackson's famous case of Mary, the super-scientist who learns all the physical information while confined in a black-and-white room. According to Jackson, if physicalism is true, then Mary's physical knowledge should allow her to deduce what it's like to see in color. Yet it seems intuitively clear that she learns something when she leaves the room. But then how can consciousness be physical? Arguably, whether this sort of reasoning is sound depends on how phenomenal concepts and phenomenal knowledge are construed. For example, some argue that the Mary case reveals something about phenomenal concepts but has no implications for the nature of consciousness itself. Are responses along these lines adequate? Or does the problem arise again at the level of phenomenal concepts? The papers in this volume engage with the latest developments in this debate. The authors' perspectives range widely. For example, Daniel Dennett argues that anti-physicalist arguments such as the knowledge argument are simply confused; David Papineau grants that such arguments at least reveal important features of phenomenal concepts; and David Chalmers defends the anti-physicalist arguments, arguing that the "phenomenal concept strategy" cannot succeed






 
Baker, John R. (1946). A critique of materialism. Hibbert Journal 45:31-37.   (Google) 
 
Balog, Katalin (2004). Review: Thinking about consciousness. Mind 113 (452).   (Google)
Abstract: Papineau in his book provides a detailed defense of physicalism via what has recently been dubbed the “phenomenal concept strategy”. I share his enthusiasm for this approach. But I disagree with his account of how a physicalist should respond to the conceivability arguments. Also I argue that his appeal to teleosemantics in explaining mental quotation is more like a promissory note than an actual theory.
 
Barnette, R. L. (1978). Grounding the mental. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 39 (September):92-105.   (Google | More links) 





 
Bissett Pratt, James (1922). The new materialism. Journal of Philosophy 19 (13):337-351.   (Google | More links) 




 
Fox, Michael (1978). Beyond materialism. Dialogue 17:367-70.   (Google) 
 
Goldstein, Irwin (2004). Neural Materialism, Pain's Badness, and a Posteriori Identities. In Maite Ezcurdia, Robert Stainton & Christopher Viger (eds.), New Essays in the Philosophy of Language and Mind. University of Calgary Press.   (Google)
Abstract: Orthodox neural materialists think mental states are neural events or orthodox material properties of neutral events. Orthodox material properties are defining properties of the “physical”. A “defining property” of the physical is a type of property that provides a necessary condition for something’s being correctly termed “physical”. In this paper I give an argument against orthodox neural materialism. If successful, the argument would show at least some properties of some mental states are not orthodox material properties of neural events. I argue against the existence of a posteriori identities.
 
Hancock, Roger (1967). Materialism, privacy, and reference. Southern Journal of Philosophy 5:119-125.   (Google) 
 
Hill, Christopher S. (1991). Sensations: A Defense of Type Materialism. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 70 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: This is a book about sensory states and their apparent characteristics. It confronts a whole series of metaphysical and epistemological questions and presents an argument for type materialism: the view that sensory states are identical with the neural states with which they are correlated. According to type materialism, sensations are only possessed by human beings and members of related biological species; silicon-based androids cannot have sensations. The author rebuts several other rival theories (dualism, double aspect theory, eliminative materialism, functionalism), and explores a number of important issues: the forms and limits of introspective awareness of sensations, the semantic properties of sensory concepts, knowledge of other minds, and unity of consciousness. The book is a significant contribution to the philosophy of mind, and has much to say to psychologists and cognitive scientists







 
Hopkins, James (online). Mind as metaphor: A physicalistic approach to the problem of consciousness.   (Cited by 3 | Google)
Abstract: In what follows I present an approach to the problem of consciousness, which I take to be suggested by Wittgenstein's remarks on sensation. As sketched here, this consists of a number of empirical hypotheses about the mind and how we represent it, and a series of arguments that these hypotheses explain phenomena which constitute the problem of consciousness, in such a way as to render them neither mysterious nor problematic
 
Howell, Robert J. (online). The Hard Problem of Consciousness. Scholarpedia.   (Google) 
 
Hubbard, John (ms). Parsimony and the mind.   (Google) 
 
Hutto, Daniel D. & Stamenov, Maxim I. (eds.) (2000). Beyond Physicalism (Advances in Consciousness Research Series). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   (Google) 
 
Jacobs, Norman (1937). Physicalism and sensation sentences. Journal of Philosophy 34 (22):602-611.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 





 
Khatami, Mahmoud (2005). On the physicalistic approach to consciousness. Teorema 24 (1):35-51.   (Google) 
 
Kirsh, Marvin E. (ms). Einstein and Mythology : The Lengthier the Relations in a Myth the Greater Its' Mass.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The theory of relativity (1) is considered form a perspective of folklore. Abstracted entities in the theory of relativity are stripped of units in order to provide explanation, to expose an ordinary meaning that employs a fulcrum for visual description. It is suggested that components of the theory’s construction are not only unusually compatible with religious and spiritual but are also unaccounted for scientifically; they may not render the expected power struggle of church doctrine with scientific notions but an opposite situation in which logical contradiction at the root level of physical meaning and symbolism is absent and might exist only with respect to active perceptual structuring, either functioning on the unknown or belief. This situation, is projected to exist in a volatile mythological form as a ‘fulcrum’ like bridge between points of dispersion in which the (invisible) entity of mass assumes an added social (or physical) weight imposed by the assumption of the existence of massless space; especially, should its’ logically non excludable converse situation, of exclusively “mass and force containing space” for all phenomenon, find future explanation and validity.





 
Livaditis, Miltos & Tsatalmpasidou, Evgenia (2007). A critical review of the physicalistic approaches of the mind and consciousness. Cognitive Processing 8 (1):1-9.   (Google | More links) 





 
Lloyd, Peter (1993). Is the mind physical? Dissecting conscious brain tissue. Philosophy Now 6.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Locke, Don (1971). Must a materialist pretend he's anaesthetized? Philosophical Quarterly 21 (July):217-31.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Lund, D. H. (2000). Materialism and the subject of consciousness. Idealistic Studies 30 (1):7-23.   (Google) 
 
Maxwell, Nicholas (2007). From Knowledge to Wisdom (Second Edition). Pentire Press.   (Google | More links) 




 
McCauley, Robert N. (ed.) (1996). The Churchlands and Their Critics. Blackwell Publishers.   (Google) 
 
McGlone, Michael (ms). Strong Impossibilities (Partial Draft 1).   (Google)
Abstract: A strong impossibility is a situation that is epistemically, but not metaphysically, possible. Opponents of strong impossibilities (including Chalmers, Jackson and Stalnaker) have argued that we have “overwhelming reason” to reject and “very little” or “no reason” to think that such impossibilities exist. This partial draft argues that there are strong impossibilities and (very briefly) discusses the manner in which the existence of strong impossibilities is related to some much-discussed arguments in the philosophy of conscious experience. (The full version of the paper will ultimately include a reply to the most significant argument against strong impossibilities, and a (slightly) more involved discussion of the relevance of all of this to issues in the philosophy of conscious experience.)
 
McLaughlin, Brian P. (2007). Type materialism for phenomenal consciousness. In Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Minsky, Marvin L. (online). Minds are simply what brains do.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Noren, Stephen J. (1973). Materialism, sentience and ontology. Metaphilosophy 4 (January):47-53.   (Google | More links) 




 
Robinson, William S. (1982). Sellarsian materialism. Philosophy of Science 49 (June):212-27.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 






 
Rosenthal, David M. (2004). Subjective character and reflexive content. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 68 (1):191-198.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: I. Zombies and the Knowledge Argument John Perry






 
Ruediger, W. C. (1924). Monism and consciousness. Journal of Philosophy 21 (13):347-352.   (Google | More links) 





 
Seager, William E. (1992). Metaphysics of Consciousness. Routledge and Kegan Paul.   (Cited by 22 | Annotation | Google)





Abstract: Metaphysics of Consciousness , a volume in the series Philosophical Issues in Science , discusses the philosophical issue of the nature of consciousness. William Seager argues that the purely physicalist or materialist view of human consciousness is by no means disproved and is in fact strongly supported by some developments in artificial intelligence. William Seager proceeds by addressing the problems of consciousness that remain even for a minimal physicalism. The particular modes of subjective consciousness that constitute experience threaten a paradigm of scientific understanding, labelled "physical resolution," that prospers in all other realms of inquiry. A phenomenon is physically resolved by demonstrating that its components are made up of purely physical parts and its causal efficacy is grounded in the physical properties of parts. The apparent inability to resolve physical consciousness leaves it not only inexplicable, but inexplicable in a way that threatens even a minimal physicalism. This book is distinctive in its emphasis on the legitimacy of inexplicability and its argument that consciousness transcends the paradigm of physical resolution. It will be of great use to advanced students and lecturers in philosophy
 
Sellars, Roy Wood (1944). Is naturalism enough? Journal of Philosophy 41 (September):533-543.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 





 
Skinner, Jane (2006). Beyond materialism: Mental capacity and naturalism, a consideration of method. Metaphilosophy 37 (1):74-91.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This article challenges the neo-Darwinist physicalist position assumed by currently prevalent naturalizing accounts of consciousness. It suggests instead an evolutionary (Deweyan) understanding of cognitive emergence and an acceptance of mental capacity as a phenomenon in its own right, differing qualitatively from, although not independent of, the physical and material world. I argue that if we accept that consciousness is an adaptation enabling survival through immediate individual intuition of the world, we may accept this metaphysics as a given. Methodological focus can then shift to investigating the, as yet untheorized, nature of consciousness itself as capacity/interconnectivity/potential. The article accepts Joseph Margolis's recent advocacy of a pragmatist approach that is "natural but not naturalizable" (Margolis 2002, 7), that is, an anti-reductionist as opposed to an eliminativist position, but it seeks to develop this position further and to give it new direction






 
Snowdon, Paul F. (1998). Strawson's agnostic materialism. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 63 (2):455-460.   (Google | More links) 




 
Sundström, Pär (2002). Nagel's case against physicalism. Sats 3 (2):91-108.   (Google | More links) 




 
Trogdon, Kelly (2009). Daniel Stoljar, Ignorance and Imagination: The epistemic Origin of the problem of Consciousness. Philosophical Review 118 (2).   (Google)
Abstract: Stoljar’s book has three parts. In the first part, he discusses the “problem of experience”: though we have experiences, it isn’t clear that the experiential fits into the actual world, given that the actual world is fundamentally non-experiential. Stoljar focuses on what he views as one facet of the problem of experience, the “logical problem”, which consists of three jointly inconsistent claims: (T1) there are experiential truths; (T2) if there are experiential truths, every experiential truth is entailed by some non-experiential truth; and (T3) if there are experiential truths, not every experiential truth is entailed by some non-experiential truth. The logical problem is a problem, according to Stoljar, because each of T1–T3 is prima facie plausible. In the second part, Stoljar sets out his solution to the logical problem, the “epistemic view”, and defends it against various objections. According to the epistemic view, (i) we’re ignorant of a special type of empirical experience-relevant non-experiential truth; (ii) were we to come to understand truths of this type, we would see that the modal arguments against physicalism (i.e. the zombie and knowledge arguments) fail; and (iii) given (i) and (ii), we should reject T3 in order to resolve the logical problem. In the third part Stoljar argues that alternative solutions to the logical problem either fail or collapse into the epistemic view. While this is certainly the most careful and extended defense of the epistemic view to date (a view, by the way, in various forms, with which many seem to find sympathy), the epistemic view as Stoljar develops it faces a formidable problem. The central problem..
 
Vander Veer, Garrett (1976). Scientific materialism. Idealistic Studies 6 (January):1-19.   (Google) 
 
Wilson, George M. (1979). Cheap materialism. Midwest Studies in Philosophy 4:51-72.   (Google) 
 
Witonsky, Abe (2005). A problem with perspectival physicalism: A reply to Tye. Philosophia 32 (1-4):285-293.   (Google | More links) 




 
Zemach, Eddy M. (1997). Can a scientist be a materialist? The Philosopher 85:12-16.   (Google) 
 
1.3g Mind-Body Problem, General




Aranyosi, István (2010). Powers and the mind–body problem. International Journal of Philosophical Studies 18 (1):57 – 72.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper proposes a new line of attack on the conceivability argument for mind-body property dualism, based on the causal account of properties, according to which properties have their conditional powers essentially. It is argued that the epistemic possibility of physical but not phenomenal duplicates of actuality is identical to a metaphysical (understood as broadly logical) possibility, but irrelevant for establishing the falsity of physicalism. The proposed attack is in many ways inspired by a standard, broadly Kripkean approach to epistemic and metaphysical modality









 
Armstrong, David M. (1983). Recent work on the relation of mind and brain. In Contemporary Philosophy: A New Survey. The Hague: Nijhoff.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Bain, Alexander (1883). Mind and body. Mind 8 (31):402-412.   (Cited by 30 | Google | More links) 







 
Baker, Lynne Rudder, Our place in nature: Material persons and theism.   (Google)
Abstract: One of the deepest assumptions of Judaism and its offspring, Christianity, is that there is an important difference between human persons and everything else that exists in Creation. We alone are made in God’s image. We alone are the stewards of the earth. It is said in Genesis that we have “dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the birds of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth.” It is difficult to see how a traditional theist could deny the significance of the difference between human persons and the rest of Creation. We human persons are morally and ontologically special
 
Balog, Katalin (forthcoming). Acquaintance and the mind-body problem. In Christopher Hill & Simone Gozzano (eds.), Identity Theory. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: In this paper I begin to develop an account of the acquaintance that each of us has with our own conscious states and processes. The account is a speculative proposal about human mental architecture and specifically about the nature of the concepts via which we think in first personish ways about our qualia. In a certain sense my account is neutral between physicalist and dualist accounts of consciousness. As will be clear, a dualist could adopt the account I will offer while maintaining that qualia themselves are non-physical properties. In this case the non-physical nature of qualia may play no role in accounting for the features of acquaintance. But although the account could be used by a dualist, its existence provides enormous support for physicalism. In particular it provides the makings of a positive refutation (i.e., a refutation by construction) of the conceivability arguments and the Mary argument for dualism.
 
Beck, Lewis White (1940). The psychophysical as a pseudo-problem. Journal of Philosophy 37 (October):561-71.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Berger, George (1982). The mind-body problem, a psychological approach. Erkenntnis 17 (3).   (Google | More links) 




 
Bielfeldt, Dennis D. (2006). Mind in a physical world: An essay on the mind-body problem and mental causation. Zygon 41 (2):487-490.   (Google) 
 
Bissett Pratt, James (1936). The present status of the mind-body problem. Philosophical Review 45 (2):144-166.   (Google | More links) 




 
Blum, Paul Richard (online). Epistemology and Cosmology in Neoplatonism: Is Cognition a Mind-Body-Problem? Paper at Cosmos, Nature, Culture - A Transdisciplinary Conference Metanexus Conference July 18-21, 2009, Phoenix, Arizona. http://www.metanexus.net/conference2009/articles/Default.aspx?id=10790.   (Google) 
 
Bradford Smith, Henry (1922). Mind in the mechanical order. Journal of Philosophy 19 (18):489-493.   (Google | More links) 




 
Broad, C. D. (1925). The Mind and its Place in Nature. Routledge and Kegan Paul.   (Cited by 240 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Bew. van de Tarner lectures, gegeven aan het Trinity College te Cambridge in 1923.






 
Bruening, William H. (1978). No matter--never mind. Philosophical Investigations 1:43-53.   (Google) 
 
Bruiger, Dan (online). The rise and fall of reality.   (Google) 
 
Butler, Clark W. (1972). The mind-body problem: A nonmaterialistic identity thesis. Idealistic Studies 2 (September):229-48.   (Google) 
 
Campbell, Karlyn K. (1970). Body and Mind. Doubleday.   (Cited by 43 | Google) 
 
Campbell, Keith (1980). Body And Mind, Reprint. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.   (Google) 
 
Carrier, Martin & Mittelstrass, J (1991). Mind, Brain, Behavior: The Mind-Body Problem and the Philosophy of Psychology. De Gruyter.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Translation of: Geist, Gehirn, Verhalten.






 
Carington, Whately (1949). Matter, Mind And Meaning. New Haven: Yale University Press.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Carington kindly placed at my disposal, because they seem to me to illustrate some of the main themes of this book.





 
Chapman Brown, Harold (1933). Mind--an event in physical nature. Philosophical Review 42 (2):130-155.   (Google | More links) 




 
Chalmers, David J. (unknown). The first person and third person views (part I). .   (Google)
Abstract: Intro to what "first person" and "third person" mean. (outline the probs of the first person) (convenience of third person vs absoluteness of first person) (explain terminology) Dominance of third person, reasons. (embarassment with first person) (division of reactions) (natural selection - those who can make the most noise) (analogy with behaviourism) Reductionism, hard line and soft line Appropriation of first person terms by reductionists
 
Cheng, Charles L. Y. (ed.) (1975). Philosophical Aspects of the Mind-Body Problem. Hawaii University Press.   (Google) 
 
Chisholm, Roderick M. (1978). Is there a mind-body problem? Philosophic Exchange 2:25-34.   (Cited by 9 | Google) 
 
Claxton, Guy (2003). The mind-body problem--who cares? Journal of Consciousness Studies 10 (12):35-37.   (Google | More links) 




 
Cooper, W. E. (1977). Beyond materialism and back again. Dialogue 16 (June-July):191-206.   (Google) 
 
Crane, Tim (2000). Dualism, monism, physicalism. Mind and Society 1 (2):73-85.   (Google)
Abstract: Dualism can be contrasted with monism, and also with physicalism. It is argued here that what is essential to physicalism is not just its denial of dualism, but the epistemological and ontological authority it gives to physical science. A physicalist view of the mind must be reductive in one or both of the following senses: it must identify mental phenomena with physical phenomena (ontological reduction) or it must give an explanation of mental phenomena in physical terms (explanatory or conceptual reduction). There is little reason to call a view which is not reductive in either of these senses “physicalism”. If reduction is rejected, then a non-physicalist form of monism is still available, which may be called “emergentism”
 
Patterson, Sarah & Crane, Tim (eds.) (2000). History of the Mind-Body Problem. Routledge.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This collection of new essays put the debates on the mind-body problem into historical context. The discussions range from Aristotle, Aquinas and Descartes to the origins of the qualia and intentionality





 
Drake, Durant (1929). Beyond monism and dualism. Journal of Philosophy 26 (15):402-407.   (Google | More links) 





 
Dretske, Fred (1994). Mind and brain. In The Mind-Body Problem: A Guide to the Current Debate. Cambridge: Blackwell.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Duniho, Fergus (1991). The Mind/Body Problem and its Solution. Dissertation, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute   (Google) 
 
Elitzur, Avshalom C. (2009). Consciousness makes a difference: A reluctant dualist’s confession. In A. Batthyany & A. C. Elitzur (eds.), Irreducibly Conscious: Selected Papers on Consciousness.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper’s outline is as follows. In sections 1-3 I give an exposi¬tion of the Mind-Body Problem, with emphasis on what I believe to be the heart of the problem, namely, the Percepts-Qualia Nonidentity and its incompatibility with the Physical Closure Paradigm. In 4 I present the “Qualia Inaction Postulate” underlying all non-interactionist theo¬ries that seek to resolve the above problem. Against this convenient postulate I propose in section 5 the “Bafflement Ar¬gument,” which is this paper's main thesis. Sections 6-11 critically dis¬cuss attempts to dismiss the Bafflement Argument by the “Baf¬flement=Mis¬perception Equation.” Section 12 offers a refutation of all such attempts in the form of a concise “Asymmetry Proof.” Section 13 points out the bearing of the Bafflement Argument on the evolutionary role of consciousness while section 14 acknowledges the price that has to be paid for it in terms of basic physical principles. Section 15 summarizes the paper, pointing out the inescapability of interactionist dualism.






 
Fahrenberg, Jochen & Cheetham, Marcus (2000). The mind-body problem as seen by students of different disciplines. Journal of Consciousness Studies 7 (5):47-59.   (Cited by 9 | Google) 
 
Fehr, Fred S. (1991). Mind and body: An apparent perceptual error. Journal of Mind and Behavior 12 (3):393-405.   (Google) 
 
Feigl, Herbert (1934). Logical analysis of the psychophysical problem. Philosophy of Science 1 (4):420-45.   (Cited by 14 | Google | More links) 






 
Fingelkurts, Andrew A.; Fingelkurts, Alexander A. & Neves, Carlos F. H. (2010). Emergentist Monism, Biological Realism, Operations and Brain-Mind Problem. Physics of Life Reviews 7 (2):264-268.   (Google)
Abstract: We would like to thank all the commentators who responded to our target review paper for their thought-provoking ideas and for their initially positive characterization of our theorizing. Our position provoked a broad range of reactions, from enthusiastic support to some kind of opposition. Regardless of the type of the response, one common factor appears to be the plausibility of a presented attempt to apply insights from physics, biology (neuroscience), and phenomenology of mind to form a unified theoretical framework of Operational Architectonics of brain-mind functioning.
 
Findlay, J. N. (1972). Psyche And Cerebrum. Milwaukee: Marquette University Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Fodor, Jerry A. (1981). The mind-body problem. Scientific American 244:114-25.   (Cited by 60 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Foss, Jeffrey E. (1987). Is the mind-body problem empirical? Canadian Journal of Philosophy 17 (September):505-32.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google)




  
Gennaro, Rocco J. (1996). Mind and Brain: A Dialogue on the Mind-Body Problem. Indianapolis: Hackett.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: Topics include immortality; materlialism; Descartes's 'Divisibility Argument' for dualism; the Argument from introspection'; the problems with...
 
Gendlin, Eugene T. (2000). The 'mind'/'body' problem and first-person process: Three types of concepts. In Ralph D. Ellis & Natika Newton (eds.), The Caldron of Consciousness: Motivation, Affect and Self-Organization--An Anthology. Amsterdam: J Benjamins.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Gillett, Grant R. (1985). Brain, mind and soul. Zygon 20 (December):425-434.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 




 
Gohnert, Herbert G. (1974). The logico-linguistic mind-brain problem and a proposed step towards its solution. Philosophy of Science 41 (March):1-14.   (Google | More links) 




 
Golightly, Cornelius L. (1952). Mind-body, causation and correlation. Philosophy of Science 19 (July):225-227.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Graham, George (1999). Mind, brain, world. Philosophy, Psychiatry, and Psychology 6 (3):223-225.   (Google) 
 
Hanna, Robert & Thompson, Evan (2003). The mind-body-body problem. Theoria Et Historia Scientiarum 7:24-44.   (Cited by 6 | Google)
Abstract: ? We gratefully acknowledge the Center for Consciousness Studies at the University of Arizona, Tucson, which provided a grant for the support of this work. E.T. is also supported by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada, and the McDonnell Project in Philosophy and the Neurosciences. 1 See David Woodruff Smith,
 
Harnad, Stevan (online). Harnad on Dennett on Chalmers on consciousness: The mind/body problem is the feeling/function problem.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Why, oh why do we keep conflating this question, which is about the uncertainty of sensory information, with the much more profound and pertinent one, which is about the functional explicability and causal role of feeling? 
_Kant: How is it possible for something even to be a thought (of mine)? What are the conditions for the_
 _possibility of experience (veridical or illusory) at all?_ 
That's not the right question either. The right question is not even an epistemic one, about "thought" or "knowledge" (whether veridical, illusory, or otherwise) but an "aesthesiogenic" one: How and why are there any feelings at all?





 
Harnad, Stevan (online). There is only one mind/body problem.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In our century a Frege/Brentano wedge has gradually been driven into the mind/body problem so deeply that it appears to have split it into two: The problem of "qualia" and the problem of "intentionality." Both problems use similar intuition pumps: For qualia, we imagine a robot that is indistinguishable from us in every objective respect, but it lacks subjective experiences; it is mindless. For intentionality, we again imagine a robot that is indistinguishable from us in every objective respect but its "thoughts" lack "aboutness"; they are meaningless. I will try to show that there is a way to re-unify the mind/body problem by grounding the "language of thought" (symbols) in our perceptual categorization capacity. The model is bottom-up and hybrid symbolic/nonsymbolic










 
Heil, John (1994). Minds and bodies. In The Mind-Body Problem: A Guide to the Current Debate. Cambridge: Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Henle, Robert J. (1951). Mind Life and Body. Ny: Macmillan.   (Google) 
 
Holmes, S. J. (1942). The two sides of reality. Philosophical Review 51 (July):383-396.   (Google | More links) 





 
Honderich, Ted (1989). Mind and Brain. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 12 | Google | More links) 




 
Humphrey, Nicholas (2000). How to solve the mind-body problem. Journal Of Consciousness Studies 7 (4):5-20.   (Cited by 46 | Google | More links) 














 
Humphrey, Nicholas (2000). In reply [reply to commentaries on "how to solve the mind-body problem"]. Humphrey, Nicholas (2000) in Reply [Reply to Commentaries on "How to Solve the Mind-Body Problem"]. [Journal (Paginated)] 7 (4):98-112.   (Google | More links) 





 
Hut, Piet & van Fraassen, Bas (1997). Elements of reality: A dialogue. Journal of Consciousness Studies 4 (2).   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 




 
Jones, Mostyn W. (forthcoming). How to make mind-brain relations clear. Journal of Consciousness Studies.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The mind-body problem arises because all theories about mind-brain connections are too deeply obscure to gain general acceptance. This essay suggests a clear, simple, mind-brain solution that avoids all these perennial obscurities. (1) It does so, first of all, by reworking Strawson and Stoljar’s views. They argue that while minds differ from observable brains, minds can still be what brains are physically like behind the appearances created by our outer senses. This could avoid many obscurities. But to clearly do so, it must first clear up its own deep obscurity about what brains are like behind appearances, and how they create the mind’s privacy, unity and qualia – all of which observable brains lack. (2) This can ultimately be done with a clear, simple assumption: our consciousness is the physical substance that certain brain events consist of beyond appearances. For example, the distinctive electrochemistry in nociceptor ion channels wholly consists of pain. This rejects that pain is a brain property: instead it’s a brain substance that occupies space in brains, and exerts forces by which it’s indirectly detectable via EEGs. (3) This assumption is justified because treating pains as physical substances avoids the perennial obscurities in mind-body theories. For example, this ‘clear physicalism’ avoids the obscure nonphysical pain of dualism and its spinoffs. Pain is instead an electrochemical substance. It isn’t private because it’s hidden in nonphysical minds, but instead because it’s just indirectly detected in the physical world in ways that leave its real nature hidden. (4) Clear physicalism also avoids puzzling reductions of private pains into more fundamental terms of observable brain activity. Instead pain is a hidden, private substance underlying this observable activity. Also, pain is fundamental in itself, for it’s what some brain activity fundamentally consists of. This also avoids reductive idealist claims that the world just exists in the mind. They yield obscure views on why we see a world that isn’t really out there. (5) Clear physicalism also avoids obscure claims that pain is information processing which is realizable in multiple hardwares (not just in electrochemistry). Molecular neuroscience now casts doubt on multiple realization. Also, it’s puzzling how abstract information gets ‘realized’ in brains and affects brains (compare ancient quandries on how universals get embodied in matter). A related idea is that of supervenient properties in nonreductive physicalism. They involve obscure overdetermination and emergent consciousness. Clear physicalism avoids all this. Pain isn’t an abstract property obscurely related to brains – it’s simply a substance in brains. (6) Clear physicalism also avoids problems in neuroscience. Neuroscience explains the mind’s unity in problematic ways using synchrony, attention, etc.. Clear physicalism explains unity in terms of intense neuroelectrical activity reaching continually along brain circuits as a conscious whole. This fits evidence that just highly active, highly connected circuits are fully conscious. Neuroscience also has problems explaining how qualia are actually encoded by brains, and how to get from these abstract codes to actual pain, fear, etc.. Clear physicalism explains qualia electrochemically, using growing evidence that both sensory and emotional qualia correlate with very specific electrical channels in neural receptors. Multiple-realization advocates overlook this important evidence. (7) Clear physicalism thus bridges the mind-brain gulf by showing how brains can possess the mind’s qualia, unity and privacy – and how minds can possess features of brain activity like occupying space and exerting forces. This unorthodox nonreductive physicalism may be where physicalism leads to when stripped of all its reductive and nonreductive obscurities. It offers a clear, simple mind-body solution by just filling in what neuroscience is silent about, namely, what brain matter is like behind perceptions of it.





 
Kim, Jaegwon (2003). Logical positivism and the mind-body problem. In Logical Empiricism: Historical & Contemporary Perspectives. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.   (Google) 
 
Kim, Jaegwon (2001). Mental causation and consciousness: The two mind-body problems for the physicalist. In Carl Gillett & Barry M. Loewer (eds.), Physicalism and its Discontents. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 9 | Google) 
 
Kim, Jaegwon (1997). The mind-body problem: Taking stock after forty years. Philosophical Perspectives 11:185-207.   (Cited by 26 | Google | More links) 





 
Kim, Jaegwon (2004). The mind-body problem at century's turn. In The Future for Philosophy. Oxford: Clarendon Press.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Kim, Jaegwon (1998). The mind-body problem after fifty years. In Current Issues in Philosophy of Mind. New York: Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 8 | Google) 
 
King, Peter (2005). Why isn't the mind-body problem medieval? In Peter King (ed.), Forming the Mind. Springer-Verlag.   (Google) 
 
Kirk, Robert E. (2003). Mind and Body. Acumen.   (Google | More links) 





 
Kneale, M. (1950). What is the mind-body problem? Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 50:105-22.   (Google) 
 
Kniffin, KM (2006). Show me the status: Money as a kind of currency. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 29 (2):188-+.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Currencies that are recognized as money cannot be easily distinguished from alternative currencies such as status. Numerous examples demonstrate the need for status to be recognized as a motivator alongside, at least, money. Lea & Webley (L&W) acknowledge the roles of status; however, a closer focus is warranted. (Published OnlineApril52006)








 
Kohler, Wolfgang (1960). The mind-body problem. In Sidney Hook (ed.), Dimensions of Mind. New York University Press.   (Google) 
 
Kraemer, Eric Russert (1979). The mind-body problem reconsidered: A reply to Davis. Journal of Thought 14 (April):109-113.   (Google) 
 
Kuczynski, John-Michael M. (2004). A quasi-materialist, quasi-dualist solution to the mind-body problem. Kriterion 45 (109):81-135.   (Google | More links) 







 
Kuczynski, John-Michael M. (2001). Materialism, causation, and the mind-body problem. Prima Philosophia 14 (1):69-90.   (Google) 
 
Kuiper, John (1954). Roy wood Sellars on the mind-body problem. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 15 (September):48-64.   (Google | More links) 





 
Levin, Michael E. (1979). Metaphysics and the Mind-Body Problem. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 13 | Google) 
 
Lewis, Harry A. (1963). Mind and body. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 63:1-22.   (Google) 
 
Lockwood, Michael (1989). Mind, Brain, and the Quantum. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 115 | Annotation | Google)




  
Ludwig, Kirk A. (2002). Mind/body problem I. In Stephen P. Stich & Ted A. Warfield (eds.), Blackwell Guide to Philosophy of Mind. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Lund, D. H. (1994). Perception, Mind, and Personal Identity: A Critique of Materialism. University Press of America.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Lycan, William G. (2002). Mind/body problem II. In Stephen P. Stich & Ted A. Warfield (eds.), Blackwell Guide to Philosophy of Mind. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
MacKenzie, J. S. (1911). Mind and body. Mind 20 (80):489-506.   (Google | More links) 





 
Mace, C. A. (1966). The 'body mind problem' in philosophy, psychology and medicine. Philosophy 41 (April):153-164.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Macnamara, John (1994). The mind-body problem and contemporary psychology. In The Mind-Body Problem: A Guide to the Current Debate. Cambridge: Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Martin, Michael (1971). The body-mind problem and neurophysiological reduction. Theoria 37:1-14.   (Google) 
 
Matson, Wallace I. (1966). Why isn't the mind-body problem ancient? In Paul K. Feyerabend & Grover Maxwell (eds.), Mind, Matter, and Method: Essays in Philosophy and Science in Honor of Herbert Feigl. University of Minnesota Press.   (Cited by 10 | Google) 
 
Maudsley, Henry (1887). The physical conditions of consciousness. Mind 12 (48):489-515.   (Google | More links) 





 
Maxwell, Nicholas (2001). The Human World in the Physical Universe: Consciousness, Free Will and Evolution. Lanham: Rowman &Amp; Littlefield.   (Cited by 11 | Google)
Abstract: This book tackles the problem of how we can understand our human world embedded in the physical universe in such a way that justice is done both to the richness...
 
McCabe, Gordon (ms). Structural realism and the mind.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper considers whether, and how, the mind can be incorporated into structural realism. Section 1 begins with some definitions, and briefly reviews the main problems which beset structural realism. The existence of the mind is proffered as an additional problem, to which the rest of the paper is devoted. Three different philosophies of the mind are analysed, beginning with eliminative materialism, which is briefly reviewed in Section 2. The identity theory of the mind-brain relationship is critically analysed in Section 3, and the notions of supervenience and emergentism are defined. In Section 4, the functionalist approach to the mind-brain relationship is introduced, and two specific functionalist approaches---the representational theory of the mind, and connectionism---are defined and appraised. It is argued that these approaches enable structural realism to be extended to include the mind. It is also argued that structural realism can be applied to the unconscious mind, and the paper concludes with the proposal that the distinction between epistemic structural realism and ontic structural realism is also valid in the case of the mind





 
McGinn, Colin (2001). How not to solve the mind-body problem. In Carl Gillett & Barry M. Loewer (eds.), Physicalism and its Discontents. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 




 
Meyer, Max (1912). The present status of the problem of the relation between mind and body. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 9 (14):365-371.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 





 
Michael, Emily (2003). Renaissance theories of body, soul, and mind. In J. N. Wright & P. Potter (eds.), Psyche and Soma. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Montague, William P. (1945). The first mystery of consciousness. Journal of Philosophy 42 (June):309-314.   (Google | More links) 





 
Moore, Jared S. (1936). Some neglected alternatives to Pratt's mind-body theory. Philosophical Review 45 (6):609-611.   (Google | More links) 





 
Moravia, Sergio & Staton, Scott (1995). The Enigma of the Mind: The Mind-Body Problem in Contemporary Thought. New York: Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Sergio Moravia's The Enigma of the Mind (originally published in Italian as L'enigma della mente) offers a broad and lucid critical and historical survey of one of the fundamental debates in the philosophy of mind - the relationship of mind and body. This problem continues to raise deep questions concerning the nature of man. The book has two central aims. First, Professor Moravia sketches the major recent contributions to the mind/body problem from philosophers of mind. Having established this framework Professor Moravia pursues his second aim - the articulation of a particular interpretation of the mental and the mind-body problem. The book's detailed and systematic treatment of this fundamental philosophical issue make it ideal for upper-level undergraduate and graduate courses in epistemology and the philosophy of mind. It should also prove provocative reading for psychologists and cognitive scientists








 
Moulyn, Adrian C. (1991). Mind-Body. Westport: Greenwood Press.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Myro, George (1994). On the distinctness of the mental and the physical. In The Mind-Body Problem: A Guide to the Current Debate. Cambridge: Blackwell.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Nagel, Thomas (2001). The psychophysical nexus. In Paul A. Boghossian & Christopher Peacocke (eds.), New Essays on the A Priori. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 19 | Google | More links)
Abstract: I. The Mind-Body Problem after Kripke This essay will explore an approach to the mind-body problem that is distinct both from dualism and from the sort of conceptual reduction of the mental to the physical that proceeds via causal behaviorist or functionalist analysis of mental concepts. The essential element of the approach is that it takes the subjective phenomenological features of conscious experience to be perfectly real and not reducible to anything else--but nevertheless holds that their systematic relations to neurophysiology are not contingent but necessary







 
Nagel, Thomas (2000). The psychophysical nexus. In Paul A. Boghossian & Christopher Peacocke (eds.), New Essays on the A New Essays on the A Priori. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 19 | Google | More links)
Abstract: I. The Mind-Body Problem after Kripke This essay will explore an approach to the mind-body problem that is distinct both from dualism and from the sort of conceptual reduction of the mental to the physical that proceeds via causal behaviorist or functionalist analysis of mental concepts. The essential element of the approach is that it takes the subjective phenomenological features of conscious experience to be perfectly real and not reducible to anything else--but nevertheless holds that their systematic relations to neurophysiology are not contingent but necessary








 
Nagel, Thomas (1993). What is the mind-body problem? In Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Consciousness. (Ciba Foundation Symposium 174).   (Cited by 14 | Annotation | Google)




  
Ornstein, Jack H. (1972). The Mind And The Brain: A Multi-Aspect Interpretation. The Hague: Nijhoff.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
O'Shaughnessy, Brian (1994). The mind-body problem. In Richard Warner & Tadeusz Szubka (eds.), The Mind-Body Problem: A Guide to the Current Debate. Blackwell.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
O'Shaughnessy, Brian (1980). The Will: A Dual Aspect Theory (2 Vols.). Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 44 | Google)
Abstract: The phenomenon of action in which the mind moves the body has puzzled philosophers over the centuries. In this new edition of a classic work of analytical philosophy, Brian O'Shaughnessy investigates bodily action and attempts to resolve some of the main problems. His expanded and updated discussion examines the scope of the will and the conditions in which it makes contact with the body, and investigates the epistemology of the body. He sheds light upon the strangely intimate relation of awareness in which we stand to our own bodies, doing so partly through appeal to the concept of the body-image. The result is a new and strengthened emphasis on the vitally important function of the bodily will as a transparently intelligible bridge between mind and body, and the proposal of a dual aspect theory of the will.
 
Perkins, Steven (2005). An orthodox Christian look at the mind-body problem. Quodlibet 7 (2).   (Google) 
 
Polanyi, Michael (1969). On body and mind. New Scholasticism 43:195-204.   (Cited by 11 | Google) 
 
Popper, Karl R.; Lindahl, B. Ingemar B. & Arhem, P. (1993). A discussion of the mind-brain problem. Theoretical Medicine 14 (2):167-180.   (Cited by 14 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper Popper formulates and discusses a new aspect of the theory of mind. This theory is partly based on his earlier developed interactionistic theory. It takes as its point of departure the observation that mind and physical forces have several properties in common, at least the following six: both are (i) located, (ii) unextended, (iii) incorporeal, (iv) capable of acting on bodies, (v) dependent upon body, (vi) capable of being influenced by bodies. Other properties such as intensity and extension in time may be added. It is argued that a fuller understanding of the nature of forces is essential for the analysis of the mind-brain problem. The relative autonomy and indeterministic nature of mind is stressed. Indeterminism is treated in relation to a theorem of Hadamard. The computer theory of mind and the Turing test are criticized. Finally the evolution of mind is discussed






 
Pratt, James B. (1936). The present status of the mind-body problem. Philosophical Review 65 (2):144-56.   (Google | More links) 






 
Pribam, Karl H. (1979). Transcending the mind/brain problem. Zygon 14 (June):103-124.   (Google) 
 
Robinson, William S. (1988). Brains and People: An Essay on Mentality and its Causal Conditions. Temple University Press.   (Cited by 9 | Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (2000). Addendum to introduction. In Materialism and the Mind-Body Problem. Hackett.   (Google)
Abstract: Mind-body materialism is at its most inviting in the context of trying to give a unified treatment of the natural world. And the principle challenge it faces is to do justice to the distinguishing features of mental phenomena, which set them off from nonmental, physical reality. This challenge it not easy to meet. In 1971 I suggested that the difficulty in meeting it makes especially appealing the eliminative materialism of Feyerabend and Rorty. If adopting the materialist view that mental phenomena are physical in nature prevents us from giving a satisfactory account of what is distinctive about the mental, perhaps the trouble is not with materialism but with the mental. If we can describe and explain everything about the world in physical terms but cannot give a satisfactory account of the distinctively mental, why not conclude that there simply are no mental states and events? Physical terms would then suffice to describe and explain the phenomena we now classify as mental. Even if describing and explaining these things physically is not a practical option, the possibility of doing so would underwrite the eliminative materialist position
 
Rosenthal, David M. (1976). Mentality and neutrality. Journal of Philosophy 73 (13):386-415.   (Google | More links) 




 
Rosenthal, David M. (ed.) (1971). Materialism and the Mind-Body Problem. Prentice-Hall.   (Cited by 15 | Annotation | Google)





Abstract: An expanded and updated edition of this classic collection.
 
Rosen, Steven M. (1986). On Whiteheadian Dualism: A Reply to Professor Griffin. Journal of Religion and Psychical Research 9 (1):11-17.   (Google)
Abstract: In this article, the author defends his claim that a subtle form of metaphysical dualism can be found in Alfred North Whitehead's central notion of the "actual occasion." Rosen contends that phenomenological philosophers such as Martin Heidegger go further than Whitehead in challenging traditional dualism.
 
Rosen, Steven M. (1983). Psi Modeling and the Psycho-Physical Problem: An Epistemological Crisis. Parapsychology Review 14 (1):17-24.   (Google) 
 
Rosen, Steven M. (1977). Toward a Representation of the "Irrepresentable". In John W. White & Stanley Krippner (eds.), Future Science. Doubleday/Anchor.   (Google) 
 
Rosen, Steven M. (1992). The Paradox of Mind and Matter: Utterly Different Yet One and the Same. In B. Rubik (ed.), The Interrelationship Between Mind and Matter. Center for Frontier Sciences Temple University.   (Google) 
 
Rovane, Carol A. (2000). Not mind-body but mind-mind. Journal of Consciousness Studies 7 (4):82-92.   (Google) 
 
Segal, Evalyn F. (1976). Mind-body: What is the question? Philosophy Forum 14:325-350.   (Google) 
 
Sellars, Roy Wood (1918). An approach to the mind-body problem. Philosophical Review 27 (2):150-163.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Sellars, Wilfrid S. (1953). A semantical solution of the mind-body problem. Methodos 5 (September):45-84.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Sellars, Wilfrid S. (1971). The double knowledge approach to the mind-body problem. New Scholasticism 45:269-89.   (Google) 
 
Shaffer, Jerome A. (1965). Recent work on the mind-body problem. American Philosophical Quarterly 2 (April):81-104.   (Cited by 9 | Google) 
 
Sherrington, Charles S. (1940). Man On His Nature. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 149 | Google) 
 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1994). The mind-body problem. In The Mind-Body Problem: A Guide to the Current Debate. Cambridge: Blackwell.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 




 
Slezak, Peter (2000). The mind-brain problem. In Evian Gordon (ed.), Integrative Neuroscience. Harwood Academic Publishers.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The problem of explaining the mind persists essentially unchanged today since the time of Plato and Aristotle. For the ancients, of course, it was not a question of the relation of mind to brain, though the question was fundamentally the same nonetheless. For Plato, the mind was conceived as distinct from the body and was posited in order to explain knowledge which transcends that available to the senses. For his successor, Aristotle, the mind was conceived as intimately related to the body as form is related to substance. On this conception, the mind is an abstract property or condition of the body itself -





 
Smith, David Woodruff (1995). Mind and body. In Barry C. Smith & David Woodruff Smith (eds.), The Cambridge Companion to Husserl. New York: Cambridge University Press.   (Google) 
 
Smythies, J. R. (1989). The mind-body problem. In J. R. Smythies & John Beloff (eds.), The Case for Dualism. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.   (Google) 
 
Strawson, Galen (1994). The experiential and the non-experiential. In Richard Warner & Tadeusz Szubka (eds.), The Mind-Body Problem: A Guide to the Current Debate. Blackwell.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Trumbull Ladd, George (1888). On body and mind. Mind 13 (52):627-629.   (Google | More links) 




 
Turner, J. E. (1913). Dr. strong on "the nature of consciousness". Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 10 (25):678-686.   (Google | More links) 





 
Umapathy, Ranjan (1996). The mind-body problem: A comparative study. Journal of Indian Council of Philosophical Research 13 (3):25-51.   (Google) 
 
Wagner, Steven J. (1994). Supervenience, recognition, and consciousness. In Richard Warner & Tadeusz Szubka (eds.), The Mind-Body Problem: A Guide to the Current Debate. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Warner, Richard & Szubka, Tadeusz (eds.) (1994). The Mind-Body Problem: A Guide to the Current Debate. Blackwell.   (Cited by 19 | Annotation | Google)




  
Watkins, J. W. N. (1977). Moritz Schlick and the mind-body problem. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 28 (4).   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 





 
Wee, Cecilia & Pelczar, Michael (2008). Descartes' dualism and contemporary dualism. The Southern Journal of Philosophy 46 (1):145-160.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: After drawing a distinction between two kinds of dualism -- numerical dualism (defined in terms of identity) and modal dualism (defined in terms of supervenience) -- we argue that Descartes is a numerical dualist, but not a modal dualist. Since most contemporary dualists advocate modal dualism, the relation of Descartes' views to the contemporary philosophy of mind are more complex than is commonly assumed.





 
Weintraub, Ruth (1999). The spatiality of the mental and the mind-body problem. Synthese 117 (3):409-17.   (Google | More links) 






 
Whiteley, C. H. (1945). The relation between mind and body. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 45:119-130.   (Google) 
 
Wilson, D. L. (1976). On the nature of consciousness and of physical reality. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 19:568-581.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Wisdom, John O. (1957). Some main mind-body problems. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 60:187-210.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Wood Sellars, Roy (1938). An analytic approach to the mind-body problem. Philosophical Review 47 (5):461-487.   (Google | More links) 




 
Wozniak, Robert H. (online). Mind and body: Rene Descartes to William James.   (Cited by 10 | Google | More links) 





 
Wright, J. N. & Potter, P. (eds.) (2003). Psyche and Soma: Physicians and Metaphysicians on the Mind-Body Problem From Antiquity to Enlightenment. Oxford University Press University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: This is a multi-disciplinary exploration of the history of understanding of the human mind or soul and its relationship to the body, through the course of more than two thousand years. Thirteen specially commissioned chapters, each written by a recognized expert, discuss such figures as the doctors Hippocrates and Galen, the theologians St Paul, Augustine, and Aquinas, and philosophers from Plato to Leibniz
 
1.4 Specific Views on Consciousness




Gallagher, Shaun (2001). Book review. The bodily nature of consciousness: Sartre and contemporary philosophy of mind Kathleen Wider. Mind 110 (438).   (Google) 
 
Katsafanas, Paul (2005). Nietzsche's theory of mind: Consciousness and conceptualization. European Journal of Philosophy 13 (1):1–31.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: I show that Nietzsche's puzzling and seemingly inconsistent claims about consciousness constitute a coherent and philosophically fruitful theory. Drawing on some ideas from Schopenhauer and F.A. Lange, Nietzsche argues that conscious mental states are mental states with conceptually articulated content, whereas unconscious mental states are mental states with non-conceptually articulated content. Nietzsche's views on concepts imply that conceptually articulated mental states will be superficial and in some cases distorting analogues of non-conceptually articulated mental states. Thus, the claim that conscious states have a conceptual articulation renders comprehensible Nietzsche's claim that consciousness is "superficial" and "falsifying."





 
Vimal, Ram Lakhan Pandey (2009). Dependent Co-origination and Inherent Existence: Dual-Aspect Framework. Vision Research Institute: Living Vision and Consciousness Research 1 (2).   (Google)
Abstract: Nāgārjuna rejects ‘inherent existence’ or ‘essence’ in favor of co-dependent origination, and that is also why he rejects causality. Causality is a major issue in metaphysical views; for example, one could argue that consciousness causes/affects our brain/behavior/function/matter or vice-versa. My goals are as follows: (i) which entities lack ‘inherent existence’ or ‘essence’ and which ones inherently exist? (ii) Do the entities that lack inherent existence dependently co-arise and hence can we reject causality as in Nāgārjuna’s philosophy? (iii) Do the entities that exist inherently cause entities that lack inherent existence? (iv) Do structure, function, experience, and environment cause each other? And (v) we critically analyze, extend, and examine Nāgārjuna’s philosophy of dependent co-origination (Nāgārjuna & Garfield, 1995)with respect to the dual-aspect-dual-mode PE-SE framework (Vimal, 2008a, 2008b, 2009a, 2009c). Our analysis suggests that: (i)All conventional entities lack inherently existence, except subjective experiences (SEs)/proto-experiences (PEs) that are fundamental and irreducible and hence inherently exist. (ii) The entities that lack inherent existence dependently co-arise, and hence causality for them can be rejected but instead conditions (such as efficient, percept-object, immediate, and dominant conditions) might be necessary, as in Nāgārjuna’s philosophy. (iii) It is not clear that SEs that exist inherently cause entities that lack inherent existence, but one could argue that (a) superposed PEs/SEs in the mental aspect of stings or elementary particles might be the motivation for the evolution to form neural-nets to realize a specific SE, and (b) Nāgārjuna’s rejection of causality and ‘relational ontology’ (Caponigro & Prakash, 2009) need to be reconsidered for SEs. For example, the SE redness (redness-bhutatma (Vimal, 2009g)) inherently, independently, and eternally exists; and hence causality may not be rejected and the ‘relational ontology’ may not apply for any such SE. (iv) It is not clear that structure, function, experience, and environment cause each other, but they might be linked via conditions. (v) Furthermore, (a) an entity has double aspect: mental and material aspects, (b) string is a dual-aspect entity that dependently co-arises from string-vacuum or brane, and (c) the dual-aspect-dual-mode PE-SE framework is consistent with these premises. For example, PEs/SEs inherently exist and are in superposed form in the mental aspect of (a) string-vacuum and/or brane before Big-Bang, (b) strings, elementary particles (bosons and fermions) and all evolved entities after Big-Bang, and (c) entities before and after Big-Freeze/Big-Crunch or entities in cyclic universe as in the big bounce/quantum-bounce (Loop Quantum Gravity) framework. However, the selection of a specific SE has dependent co-origination (and hence not inherently existent, consistent with Nāgārjuna), i.e., a specific SE occurs in brain when (i) relevant neural-net is formed via neural Darwinism, (ii) the specific SE is selected via matching and selection mechanisms, and (iii) the necessary ingredients ―such as wakefulness, re-entry, attention, working memory, stimulus at above threshold, and neural-net PEs― are satisfied. If this is true, then only experiences (PEs/SEs in superposed form) are inherently existent and other entities have dependent co-origination.
 
1.4a Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness




1.4a.1 Higher-Order Perception Theories of Consciousness




Lycan, William G. (1995). Consciousness as internal monitoring. Philosophical Perspectives 9:1-14.   (Cited by 44 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: Locke put forward the theory of consciousness as "internal Sense" or "reflection"; Kant made it inner sense, by means of which the mind intuits itself or its inner state." 1 On that theory, consciousness is a perception-like second-order representing of our own psychological states events. The term "consciousness," of course, has many distinct uses







 
Lycan, William G. (2004). The superiority of Hop to HOT. In Rocco J. Gennaro (ed.), Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness: An Anthology. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 14 | Google | More links) 




 
1.4a.2 Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness, Misc




Hellie, Benj (2007). 'There's something it's like' and the structure of consciousness. Philosophical Review 116 (3):441--63.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: I discuss the meaning of 'There's something e is like', in the context of a reply to Eric Lormand's 'The explanatory stopgap'. I argue that Lormand is wrong to think it has a specially perceptual meaning. Rather, it has one of at least four candidate meanings: (a) e is some way as regards its subject; (b) e is some way and e's being that way is in the possession of its subject; (c) e is some way in the awareness of its subject; (d) e's subject is the "experiencer" of e. I provide additional argumentation for the view in this paper that in the context, 'like this' functions as a predicate variable.





 
Lycan, William G., A simple point about an alleged objection to higher-order theories of consciousness.   (Google)
Abstract: For purposes of this paper, a conscious state is a mental state whose subject is directly or at least nonevidentially aware of being in it. (The state does not count as conscious if the subject has only been told about it by a cognitive scientist or psychologist; introspectively would be better, but no one should say that a state is conscious only if its subject actively introspects it.). N.b., this usage is only one among several quite different though of course not competing ones; the phrase has been used in at least two other senses, as by, respectively, Dretske (1993, 1995) and Block (1995).1 My definition is stipulative, but not brutely so; it settles on one thing that is often meant by conscious state cf. a conscious memory, a conscious desire, a conscious intention, a conscious decision. According to higher-order (HO) theories of consciousness in this sense of consciousness, what makes a mental state a conscious one is that it is represented by another of the subject’s mental states, that in virtue of which s/he is aware of it. Some practitioners follow Locke in taking the higher-order state to be quasi-perceptual (Armstrong, 1968, 1980, Lycan 1991, 1996); others say it may be merely a thought about the original state (Rosenthal, 1986, 1990).2 There is an alleged objection to such theories, that originated with Goldman (1993)Error: Illegal entry in bfrange block in ToUnicode CMapError: Illegal entry in bfrange block in ToUnicode CMapError: Illegal entry in bfrange block in ToUnicode CMap3 and has since been voiced and discussed by others (Dretske 1995, Stubenberg 1998, Van Gulick 2000, 2005, Gennaro 2005, Kriegel 2009). I say alleged, because
 
Van Gulick, Robert (2004). Higher-order global states (hogs): An alternative higher-order model of consciousness. In Rocco J. Gennaro (ed.), Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness: An Anthology. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 10 | Google) 
 
1.4a.3 Higher-Order Thought Theories of Consciousness




Rosenthal, David M., Consciousness.   (Google)
Abstract: One phenomenon pertains roughly to being awake. A person or other creature is conscious when it's awake and mentally responsive to sensory input; otherwise it's unconscious. This kind of consciousness figures most often in everyday discourse
 
Rosenthal, David M., The mind and its expression.   (Google)
Abstract: pain' and ┌I think that p┐ express the pain and the thought that p, themselves. The book is most impressive. It is packed with careful argument, and addresses a remarkable range of important issues about the mind. I have very much enjoyed studying it
 
Aquila, Richard E. (1990). Consciousness as higher-order thoughts: Two objections. American Philosophical Quarterly 27 (1):81-87.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google)




  
Balog, Katalin (2000). Phenomenal Judgment and the HOT theory: Comments on David Rosenthal’s “Consciousness, Content, and Metacognitive Judgments”. Consciousness and Cognition 9 (2):215-219.   (Google)
Abstract: In this commentary I criticize David Rosenthal’s higher order thought theory of consciousness (HOT). This is one of the best articulated philosophical accounts of consciousness available. The theory is, roughly, that a mental state is conscious in virtue of there being another mental state, namely, a thought to the effect that one is in the first state. I argue that this account is open to the objection that it makes “HOT-zombies” possible, i.e., creatures that token higher order mental states, but not the states that the higher order states are about. I discuss why none of the ways to accommodate this problem within HOT leads to viable positions.
 
Beeckmans, John (2007). Can higher-order representation theories pass scientific muster? Journal of Consciousness Studies 14 (s 9-10):90-111.   (Google)
Abstract: Higher-order representation (HOR) theories posit that the contents of lower-order brain states enter consciousness when tracked by a higher-order brain state. The nature of higher-order monitoring was examined in light of current scientific knowledge, primarily in experimental perceptual psychology. The most plausible candidate for higher-order state was found to be conceptual short-term memory (CSTM), a buffer memory intimately connected with a semantic engine operating in the medium of the language of thought (LOT). This combination meets many of the requirements of HOR theories, although falling short in some significant respects, most notably the inability of higher- order states to represent more than a small fraction of the information contained in primary states, especially in vision. A possible way round this obstacle is suggested, involving the representation of visual detail by means of ensemble concepts
 
Bermúdez, José Luis (2000). Consciousness, higher-order thought, and stimulus reinforcement. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 23 (2):194-195.   (Google)
Abstract: Rolls defends a higher-order thought theory of phenomenal consciousness, mapping the distinction between conscious and non-conscious states onto a distinction between two types of action and corresponding neural pathways. Only one type of action involves higher-order thought and consequently consciousness. This account of consciousness has implausible consequences for the nature of stimulus-reinforcement learning
 
Block, Ned, Comparing the major theories of consciousness.   (Google)
Abstract: This article compares the three frameworks for theories of consciousness that are taken most seriously by neuroscientists, the view that consciousness is a biological state of the brain, the global workspace perspective and an account in terms of higher order states. The comparison features the “explanatory gap” (Nagel, 1974; Levine, 1983) the fact that we have no idea why the neural basis of an experience is the neural basis of that experience rather than another experience or no experience at all. It is argued that the biological framework handles the explanatory gap better than the global workspace of higher order views. The article does not discuss quantum theories or “panpsychist” accounts according to which consciousness is a feature of the smallest particles of inorganic matter (Chalmers, 1996; Rosenberg, 2004). Nor does it discuss the “representationist” proposals (Tye, 2000; Byrne, 2001a) that are popular among philosophers but not neuroscientists
 
Block, Ned (ms). Some concepts of consciousness.   (Google)
Abstract: Consciousness is a mongrel concept: there are a number of very different "consciousnesses". Phenomenal consciousness is experience; the phenomenally conscious aspect of a state is what it is like to be in that state
 
Bremer, Manuel (2008). Peter Carruthers, consciousness: Essays from a higher-order perspective. Minds and Machines 18 (3).   (Google) 
 
Brown, Richard (ms). Consciousness, (higher-order) thoughts, and what it's like.   (Google)
Abstract: We have a vast range of conscious experience; from the taste of our favorite food, to the appearance of our favorite art, to the highs of accomplishing our goals, to the excruciating agony of a broken bone, or loss of a loved one, to wondering what time it is, or thinking about what one has to do to name but a few. Our conscious experience can be by turns exhilarating or frightening or overpowering, or just plain dull. Yet though all of this is common place it is quite mysterious how to fit this phenomenon into the natural world. Or so it seems to many philosophers and scientists, who feel, as Descartes did, that there is no hope of giving a scientific account of how consciousness arises in nature. These philosophers see ‘hard problems’ and ‘explanatory gaps’ that lead them to model consciousness as a non-physical phenomenon that is out of the reach of our scientific theories
 
Browne, Derek (1999). Carruthers on the deficits of animals. Psyche 5 (23).   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Byrne, Alex (1997). Some like it HOT: Consciousness and higher-order thoughts. Philosophical Studies 2 (2):103-29.   (Cited by 34 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Consciousness is the subject of many metaphors, and one of the most hardy perennials compares consciousness to a spotlight, illuminating certain mental goings-on, while leaving others to do their work in the dark. One way of elaborating the spotlight metaphor is this: mental events are loaded on to one end of a conveyer belt by the senses, and move with the belt










 
Byrne, Alex (2004). What phenomenal consciousness is like. In Rocco J. Gennaro (ed.), Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness: An Anthology. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 8 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The terminology surrounding the dispute between higher-order and first-order theories of consciousness is piled so high that it sometimes obscures the view. When the debris is cleared away, there is a real prospect





 
Campbell Manson, Neil (2002). What does language tell us about consciousness? First-person mental discourse and higher-order thought theories of consciousness. Philosophical Psychology 15 (3):221 – 238.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The fact that we can engage in first-person discourse about our own mental states seems, intuitively, to be bound up with consciousness. David Rosenthal draws upon this intuition in arguing for his higher-order thought theory of consciousness. Rosenthal's argument relies upon the assumption that the truth-conditions for "p" and "I think that p" differ. It is argued here that the truth-conditional schema debars "I think" from playing one of its (expressive) roles and thus is not a good test for what is asserted when "I think" is employed in making an assertoric utterance. The critique of Rosenthal's argument allows us to make explicit the intuitions which shape higher-order representation theories of consciousness in general. Consciousness and first-person mental discourse seem to be connected primarily because consciousness is (and was) an epistemic term, used to denote first-person knowledge of minds. Higher-order thought theories of consciousness draw upon this epistemic notion of consciousness, and because self-knowledge seems to involve higher-order representation, the higher-order theorist can deploy what is in effect an "error theory" about conscious experience disguised as a kind of conceptual analysis of our ordinary concept of a conscious mental state. The conclusion reached is that there is unlikely to be a simple or direct path from considerations about mental discourse to conclusions about the nature of consciousness





 
Carruthers, Peter (1989). Brute experience. Journal of Philosophy 86 (May):258-269.   (Cited by 44 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Carruthers, Peter (1992). Consciousness and concepts. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 66 (66):41-59.   (Cited by 60 | Annotation | Google)




  
Carruthers, Peter (2005). Consciousness: Essays From a Higher-Order Perspective. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 12 | Google | More links) 







 
Carruthers, Peter (2001). Consciousness: Explaining the phenomena. In D. Walsh (ed.), Evolution, Naturalism and Mind. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Can phenomenal consciousness be given a reductive natural explanation? Many people argue not. They claim that there is an









 
Carruthers, Peter (1997). Fragmentary versus reflexive consciousness. Mind and Language 12 (2):181-95.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 






 
Carruthers, Peter (2004). Hop over FOR, HOT theory. In Rocco J. Gennaro (ed.), Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness: An Anthology. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 10 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Following a short introduction, this chapter begins by contrasting two different forms of higher-order perception (HOP) theory of phenomenal consciousness - inner sense theory versus a dispositionalist kind of higher-order thought (HOT) theory - and by giving a brief statement of the superiority of the latter. Thereafter the chapter considers arguments in support of HOP theories in general. It develops two parallel objections against both first-order representationalist (FOR) theories and actualist forms of HOT theory. First, neither can give an adequate account of the distinctive features of our recognitional concepts of experience. And second, neither can explain why there are some states of the relevant kinds that are phenomenal and some that aren





 
Carruthers, Peter (2007). Higher-order theories of consciousness. In Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Cited by 7 | Google) 
 
Carruthers, Peter (online). Higher-order theories of consciousness. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.   (Google) 
 
Carruthers, Peter (1996). Language, Thought, and Consciousness. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 318 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Do we think in natural language? Or is language only for communication? Much recent work in philosophy and cognitive science assumes the latter. In contrast, Peter Carruthers argues that much of human conscious thinking is conducted in the medium of natural language sentences. However, this does not commit him to any sort of Whorfian linguistic relativism, and the view is developed within a framework that is broadly nativist and modularist. His study will be essential reading for all those interested in the nature and significance of natural language, whether they come from philosophy, psychology or linguistics















 
Carruthers, Peter (1998). Natural theories of consciousness. European Journal of Philosophy 6 (2):203-22.   (Cited by 27 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Many people have thought that consciousness









 
Carruthers, Peter (2000). Phenomenal Consciousness: A Naturalistic Theory. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 194 | Google | More links)
Abstract: How can phenomenal consciousness exist as an integral part of a physical universe? How can the technicolour phenomenology of our inner lives be created out of the complex neural activities of our brains? Many have despaired of finding answers to these questions; and many have claimed that human consciousness is inherently mysterious. Peter Carruthers argues, on the contrary, that the subjective feel of our experience is fully explicable in naturalistic (scientifically acceptable) terms. Drawing on a variety of interdisciplinary resources, he develops and defends a novel account in terms of higher-order thought. He shows that this can explain away some of the more extravagant claims made about phenomenal consciousness, while substantively explaining the key subjectivity of our experience. Written with characteristic clarity and directness, and surveying a wide range of extant theories, this book is essential reading for all those within philosophy and psychology interested in the problem of consciousness

















 
Carruthers, Peter (2003). Phenomenal concepts and higher-order experiences. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 68 (2):316-336.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links) 





 
Carruthers, Peter (online). Precis of Phenomenal Consciousness: A Naturalistic Theory.   (Google) 
 
Carruthers, Peter (2000). Replies to critics: Explaining subjectivity. Psyche 6 (3).   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Carruthers, Peter (online). Reply to Seager.   (Google | More links) 




 
Rosenthal, David (2005). The higher-order model of consciousness. In Rita Carter (ed.), Consciousness. Weidenfeld & Nicolson.   (Google)
Abstract: All mental states, including thoughts, feelings, perceptions, and sensations, often occur consciously. But they all occur also without being conscious. So the first thing a theory of consciousness must do is explain the difference between thoughts, feelings, perceptions, and sensations that are conscious and those which are not
 
Carruthers, Peter (2005). Why the question of animal consciousness might not matter very much. Philosophical Psychology 18 (1):83-102.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links)
Abstract: According to higher-order thought accounts of phenomenal consciousness it is unlikely that many non-human animals undergo phenomenally conscious experiences. Many people believe that this result would have deep and far-reaching consequences. More specifically, they believe that the absence of phenomenal consciousness from the rest of the animal kingdom must mark a radical and theoretically significant divide between ourselves and other animals, with important implications for comparative psychology. I shall argue that this belief is mistaken. Since phenomenal consciousness might be almost epiphenomenal in its functioning within human cognition, its absence in animals may signify only relatively trivial differences in cognitive architecture. Our temptation to think otherwise arises partly as a side-effect of imaginative identification with animal experiences, and partly from mistaken beliefs concerning the aspects of common-sense psychology that carry the main explanatory burden, whether applied to humans or to non-human animals








 
Cole, David J. (online). Sense and sentience.   (Google)
Abstract: Surely one of the most interesting problems in the study of mind concerns the nature of sentience. How is it that there are sensations, rather than merely sensings? What is it like to be a bat -- or why is it like anything at all? Why aren't we automata or responding but unfeeling Zombies? How does neural activity give rise to subjective experience? As Leibniz put the problem (Monadology section 17): 
_It must be confessed, however, that Perception_ [consciousness?]_, and that which depends upon it, are_
 _inexplicable by mechanical means, that is to say, by figures and motions. Supposing that there were a_
 _machine whose structure produced thought, sensation, and perceptions, we could conceive of it as increased_
 _in its interior size with the same proportions until one was able to enter into its interior, as he would into a_
 _mill. Now, on going into it he would find only pieces working upon one another, but never would he find_ 
_anything to explain Perception._ [Montgomery trans.] 
Copenhaver, Rebecca (ms). Reid on consciousness: HOP, HOT or FOR?   (Google | More links) 





 
Dainton, Barry F. (2004). Higher-order consciousness and phenomenal space: Reply to Meehan. Psyche 10 (1).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Meehan finds fault with a number of my arguments, and proposes that better solutions to the problems I was addressing are available if we adopt a higher-order theory of consciousness. I start with some general remarks on theories of this sort. I connect what I had to say about the A-thesis with different forms of higher-order sense theories, and explain why I ignored higher-order thought theories altogether: there are compelling grounds for thinking they cannot provide a viable account of phenomenal unity in phenomenal terms. Meehan





 
Dienes, Zoltán (2004). Assumptions of subjective measures of unconscious mental states: Higher order thoughts and bias. Journal of Consciousness Studies 11 (9):25-45.   (Cited by 14 | Google) 
 
Dretske, Fred (1995). Are experiences conscious? In Fred Dretske (ed.), Naturalizing the Mind. MIT Press.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Dretske, Fred (1993). Conscious experience. Mind 102 (406):263-283.   (Cited by 141 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 






 
Droege, Paula (online). Consciousness, higher-order theories of. Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.   (Google) 
 
Droege, Paula (2003). Caging the Beast: A Theory of Sensory Consciousness. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 






 
Dulany, Donelson E. (2004). Higher order representation in a mentalistic metatheory. In Rocco J. Gennaro (ed.), Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness: An Anthology. John Benjamins.   (Google) 
 
Francescotti, Robert M. (1995). Higher-order thoughts and conscious experience. Philosophical Psychology 8 (3):239-254.   (Cited by 4 | Annotation | Google)





Abstract: For nearly a decade, David Rosenthal has proposed that a mental state M of a creature C is conscious just in case C has a suitable higher-order thought directed toward M. While this theory has had its share of criticism in recent years, I believe that the real difficulties have been ignored. In this essay, I show that the presence of a higher order is insufficient for conscious experience, even if we suppose that the thought satisfies the constraints that Rosenthal lists (i.e. that it is assertoric in nature, that it is had occurently, and that it is non-inferentially formed). The only way Rosenthal's view could possibly yield sufficient conditions is by requiring that the higher-order thought be suitably causally related to its object. Yet, as I also show, the only causal constraint strong enough to do the job is not only ill-motivated but probably false
 
Gennaro, Rocco J. (1993). Brute experience and the higher-order thought theory of consciousness. Philosophical Papers 22 (1):51-69.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google)




  
Gennaro, Rocco J. (1996). Consciousness and Self-Consciousness: A Defense of the Higher-Order Thought Theory of Consciousness. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 51 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This interdisciplinary work contains the most sustained attempt at developing and defending one of the few genuine theories of consciousness.







 
Gennaro, Rocco J. (2000). Fiction, pleasurable tragedy, and the HOT theory of consciousness. Philosophical Papers 29 (2):107-20.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: [Final version in Philosophical Papers, 2000] Much has been made over the past few decades of two related problems in aesthetics. First, the "feeling fiction problem," as I will call it, asks: is it rational to be moved by what happens to fictional characters? How can we care about what happens to people who we know are not real?[i] Second, the so-called "paradox of tragedy" is embodied in the question: Why or how is it that we take pleasure in artworks (e.g. tragedies) which are clearly designed to cause in us such feelings as sadness and fear?[ii] Various solutions to these puzzles have been proposed, but my primary aim is neither to offer a novel solution nor to summarize and critique most of the alternatives.[iii] My focus instead will be on the issue of consciousness and, more specifically, to view these problems from the point of the view of the so-called "higher-order thought theory of consciousness" (the HOT theory). Although some work on these puzzles have raised important questions about the nature of consciousness and "aesthetic experience," no attempt has yet been made to examine them in light of a specific theory






 
Gennaro, Rocco J. (2004). Higher-order thoughts, animal consciousness, and misrepresentation: A reply to Carruthers and Levine. In Rocco J. Gennaro (ed.), Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness: An Anthology. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 9 | Google) 
 
Gennaro, Rocco J. (2004). Higher-order theories of consciousness: An overview. In Rocco J. Gennaro (ed.), Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness. John Benjamin.   (Cited by 18 | Google | More links) 
















 
Gennaro, Rocco J. (2002). Jean-Paul Sartre and the HOT theory of consciousness. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 32 (3):293-330.   (Cited by 11 | Google) 
 
Gennaro, Rocco J. (2003). Papineau on the actualist HOT theory of consciousness. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 81 (4):581-586.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In Thinking About Consciousness , David Papineau [2002] presents a criticism of so-called 'actualist HOT theories of consciousness'. The HOT theory, held most notably by David Rosenthal, claims that the best explanation for what makes a mental state conscious is that it is the object of an actual higher-order thought directed at the mental state. Papineau contends that actualist HOT theory faces an awkward problem in relation to higher-order memory judgements; for example, that the theory cannot explain how one could later recall an earlier experience that was not introspected. He argues that, on the HOT theory, we are even left with the absurd conclusion that the consciousness of, say, an earlier visual experience might even depend on the later act of memory. I show that Papineau's criticism of actualist HOT theory not only fails, but also that it seriously mischaracterizes and underestimates the theory. In particular, Papineau badly conflates the crucial difference between an introspective state (i.e., where a conscious HOT is directed at a mental state) and an outer-directed first-order conscious state (i.e., a case where one has a nonconscious HOT)









 
Gennaro, Rocco J. (2005). The HOT theory of consciousness: Between a rock and a hard place. Journal of Consciousness Studies 12 (2):3-21.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The so-called 'higher-order thought' (HOT) theory of consciousness says that what makes a mental state conscious is the presence of a suitable higher-order thought directed at it (Rosenthal, 1986; 1990; 1993; 2002; 2004; Gennaro, 1996; 2004). The HOT theory has been or could be attacked from two apparently opposite directions. On the one hand, there is what Stubenberg (1998) has called 'the problem of the rock' which, if successful, would show that the HOT theory proves too much. On the other hand, it might also be alleged that the HOT theory does not or cannot address the so-called 'hard problem' of phenomenal consciousness. If so, then the HOT theory would prove too little. We might say, then, that the HOT theory is arguably between a rock and a hard place. In this paper, I critically examine these objections and defend the HOT theory against them. In doing so, I hope to show that the HOT theory, or at least some version of it, neither proves too little nor too much, but is just right. I also show that these two objections are really just two sides of the same coin, and that the HOT theory is immune from David Chalmers' (1995; 1996) criticisms of other attempted reductionist accounts of consciousness






 
Gennaro, Rocco J., Visual agnosia and higher- order thought theory.   (Google)
Abstract: In general, the idea is that what makes a mental state conscious is that it is the object of some kind of higher-order representation (HOR). A mental state M becomes conscious when there is a HOR of M. A HOR is a “meta-psychological” state, i.e. a mental state directed at another mental state. So, for example, my desire to do a good powerpoint presentation becomes conscious when I am (non-inferentially) “aware” of the desire. Intuitively, it seems that conscious states, as opposed to unconscious ones, are mental states that I am “aware of” in some sense
 
Gerken, Mikkel (2008). Is there a simple argument for higher-order representation theories of awareness consciousness? Erkenntnis 69 (2):243-259.   (Google)
Abstract: William Lycan has articulated “a simple argument” for higher-order representation (HOR) theories of a variety of consciousness sometimes labeled ‘awareness consciousness’ (Lycan, Analysis 61.1, January 3–4, 2001). The purpose of this article is to critically assess the influential argument-strategy of the simple argument. I argue that, as stated, the simple argument fails since it is invalid. Moreover, I argue that an obvious “quick fix” would beg the question against competing same-order representation (SOR) theories of awareness consciousness. I then provide a reconstruction of the argument and argue that although the reconstructed argument deserves consideration, it is also too simple as stated. In particular, it raises several controversial questions about the nature of mental representation. These questions must be addressed before a verdict as to the cogency of the HOR argument-strategy can be reached. But since the questions are controversial, a cogent argument for HOR theories of awareness consciousness is unlikely to be simple
 
Gois, Isabel (2010). A dilemma for higher-order theories of consciousness. Philosophia 38 (1).   (Google)
Abstract: Higher Order theories of consciousness have their fair share of sympathisers, but the arguments mustered in their support are—to my mind—unduly persuasive. My aim in this paper is to show that Higher Order theories cannot accommodate the possibility of misrepresentation without either falling into contradiction, or collapsing into a First-Order theory. If this diagnosis is on the right track, then Higher Order theories—at least in the specific versions here considered—fail to give an account of what they set out to explain: what is distinctive of ‘conscious’ phenomena
 
Guzeldere, Guven (1996). Consciousness and the introspective link principle. In Stuart R. Hameroff, Alfred W. Kaszniak & A. C. Scott (eds.), Toward a Science of Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
Guzeldere, Guven (1995). Is consciousness the perception of what passes in one's own mind? In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Ferdinand Schoningh.   (Cited by 42 | Annotation | Google)




  
Hardcastle, Valerie Gray (2004). HOT theories of consciousness: More sad tales of philosophical intuitions gone astray. In Rocco J. Gennaro (ed.), Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness: An Anthology. John Benjamins.   (Google) 
 
Hellie, Benj (2007). Higher-order intentionalism and higher-order acquaintance. Philosophical Studies 134 (3):289--324.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: I argue against such "Relation Intentionalist" theories of consciousness as the higher-order thought and inner sense views on the grounds that they understand a subject's awareness of his or her phenomenal characters to be intentional, like seeming-seeing, rather than "direct", like seeing. The trouble with such views is that they reverse the order of explanation between phenomenal character and intentional awareness. A superior theory of consciousness, based on views expressed by Russell and Price, takes the relation of awareness to be a nonintentional "acquaintance".







 
Jacob, Pierre (1996). State consciousness revisited. Acta Analytica 11 (16):29-54.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 




 
Jamieson, Dale W. & Bekoff, Marc (1992). Carruthers on nonconscious experience. Analysis 52 (1):23-28.   (Cited by 12 | Annotation | Google)




  
Jehle, David & Kriegel, Uriah (2006). An argument against dispositionalist HOT. Philosophical Psychology 19 (4):463-476.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper we present a two-stage argument against Peter Carruthers' theory of phenomenal consciousness. The first stage shows that Carruthers' main argument against first-order representational theories of phenomenal consciousness applies with equal force against his own theory. The second stage shows that if Carruthers can escape his own argument against first-order theories, it will come at the cost of wedding his theory to certain unwelcome implausibilities. discusses Carruthers' argument against first-order representationalism. presents Carruthers' theory of consciousness. presents our argument against Carruthers' theory. sums up








 
Kobes, Bernard W. (1997). Metacognition and consciousness: Review essay of Janet Metcalfe and Arthur P. shimamura (eds), Metacognition: Knowing About Knowing. Philosophical Psychology 10 (1):93-102.   (Google)
Abstract: The field of metacognition, richly sampled in the book under review, is recognized as an important and growing branch of psychology. However, the field stands in need of a general theory that (1) provides a unified framework for understanding the variety of metacognitive processes, (2) articulates the relation between metacognition and consciousness, and (3) tells us something about the form of meta-level representations and their relations to object-level representations. It is argued that the higher-order thought theory of consciousness supplies us with the rudiments of a theory that meets these desiderata and integrates the principal findings reported in this collection
 
Kobes, Bernard W. (1995). Telic higher-order thoughts and Moore's paradox. Philosophical Perspectives 9:291-312.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 





 
Kriegel, Uriah (2007). A cross-order integration hypothesis for the neural correlate of consciousness. Consciousness & Cognition 16:897-912.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: b>. One major problem many hypotheses regarding the neural correlate of consciousness (NCC) face is what we might call “the why question”: _why _would this particular neural feature, rather than another, correlate with consciousness? The purpose of the present paper is to develop an NCC hypothesis that answers this question. The proposed hypothesis is inspired by the Cross-Order Integration (COI) theory of consciousness, according to which consciousness arises from the functional integration of a first-order representation of an external stimulus and a second-order representation of that first-order representation. The proposal comes in two steps. The first step concerns the “general shape” of the NCC and can be directly derived from COI theory. The second step is a concrete hypothesis that can be arrived at by combining the general shape with empirical considerations





 
Kriegel, Uriah (2003). Consciousness, higher-order content, and the individuation of vehicles. Synthese 134 (3):477-504.   (Cited by 19 | Google | More links)
Abstract: One of the distinctive properties of conscious states is the peculiar self- awareness implicit in them. Two rival accounts of this self-awareness are discussed. According to a Neo-Brentanian account, a mental state M is conscious iff M represents its very own occurrence. According to the Higher-Order Monitoring account, M is merely accompanied by a numerically distinct representation of its occurrence. According to both, then, M is conscious in virtue of ﬁguring in a higher-order content. The disagreement is over the question whether the higher-order content is carried by M itself or by a differ- ent state. While the Neo-Brentanian theory is phenomenologically more attractive, it is often felt to be somewhat mysterious. It is argued (i) that the difference between the Neo- Brentanian and Higher-Order Monitoring theories is smaller and more empirical than may initially seem, and (ii) that the Neo-Brentanian theory can be readily demystiﬁed. These considerations make it prima facie preferable to the Higher-Order Monitoring theory.










 
Kriegel, Uriah (2002). Consciousness, permanent self-awareness, and higher-order monitoring. Dialogue 41 (3):517-540.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Lagerspetz, Olli (2002). In the industry. Inquiry 45 (4):541-559.   (Google | More links) 







 
Liang, Caleb & Lane, Timothy (2008). Higher-Order Thought and the Problem of Radical Confabulation. The Southern Journal of Philosophy:69-98.   (Google) 
 
Lau, Hakwan (ms). A higher order bayesian decision theory of consciousness.   (Google)
Abstract: It is usually taken as given that consciousness involves superior or more elaborate forms of information processing. Contemporary models equate consciousness with global processing, system complexity, or depth or stability of computation. This is in stark contrast with the powerful philosophical intuition that being conscious is more than just having the ability to compute. I argue that it is also incompatible with current empirical findings. I present a model that is free from the strong assumption that consciousness predicts superior performance. The model is based on Bayesian decision theory, of which signal detection theory is a special case. It reflects the fact that the capacity for perceptual decisions is fundamentally limited by the presence and amount of noise in the system. To optimize performance, one therefore needs to set decision criteria that are based on the behaviour, i.e. the probability distributions, of the internal signals. One important realization is that the knowledge of how our internal signals behave statistically has to be learned over time. Essentially, we are doing statistics on our own brain. This ‘higherorder’ learning, however, may err, and this impairs our ability to set and maintain optimal criteria for perceptual decisions, which I argue is central to perception consciousness. I outline three possibilities of how conscious perception might be affected by failures of ‘higher-order’ representation. These all imply that one can have a dissociation between consciousness and performance. This model readily explains blindsight and hallucinations in formal terms, and is beginning to receive direct empirical support. I end by discussing some philosophical implications of the model
 
Liang, Caleb & Lane, Timothy (2009). Higher-order thought and pathological self: The case of somatoparaphrenia. Analysis 69 (4).   (Google) 
 
Liu, JeeLoo (2006). Review of Peter Carruthers, Consciousness: Essays From a Higher-Order Perspective. Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews 2006 (4).   (Google) 
 
Lurz, Robert W. (2000). A defense of first-order representationalist theories of mental-state consciousness. Psyche 6 (1).   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Lurz, Robert W. (2003). Advancing the debate between HOT and FO accounts of consciousness. Journal of Philosophical Research 28:23-44.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Lurz, Robert W. (2001). Begging the question: A reply to Lycan. Analysis 61 (272):313-318.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 







 
Lurz, Robert W. (2004). Either FOR or HOR: A false dichotomy. In Rocco J. Gennaro (ed.), Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness: An Anthology. John Benjamins.   (Google) 
 
Lurz, Robert W. (2003). Neither hot nor cold: An alternative account of consciousness. Psyche 8 (1).   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 





 
Lycan, William G. (1999). A response to Carruthers' Natural Theories of Consciousness. Psyche 5 (11).   (Cited by 4 | Google)
Abstract: I have very little disagreement with Carruthers' article, for our views are very similar. I think he is terminologically a bit hard on Michael Tye. I think that in invoking Swampman he is in danger of conflating teleological theories of representation with etiological theories of teleology. In response to his criticism of my own higher-order experience (HOE) view, I argue that there is good reason to believe that we human beings sport as great a degree of computational complexity as is needed for HOEs. If other animals do not exhibit a comparable degree, we should deny that they have "phenomenal-consciousness" in the strong sense of that term
 
Lycan, William G. (2001). A simple argument for a higher-order representation theory of consciousness. Analysis 61 (269):3-4.   (Cited by 26 | Google | More links) 







 
Lycan, William G. (1995). Consciousness as internal monitoring. Philosophical Perspectives 9:1-14.   (Cited by 44 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: Locke put forward the theory of consciousness as "internal Sense" or "reflection"; Kant made it inner sense, by means of which the mind intuits itself or its inner state." 1 On that theory, consciousness is a perception-like second-order representing of our own psychological states events. The term "consciousness," of course, has many distinct uses







 
Lycan, William G. & Ryder, Z. (2003). The loneliness of the long-distance truck-driver. Analysis 63 (2):132-36.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 







 
Lycan, William G. (2004). The superiority of Hop to HOT. In Rocco J. Gennaro (ed.), Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness: An Anthology. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 14 | Google | More links) 




 
Mandik, Pete (2009). Beware of the unicorn: Consciousness as being represented and other things that don't exist. Journal of Consciousness Studies 16 (1):5-36.   (Google)
Abstract: Higher-Order Representational theories of consciousness — HORs — primarily seek to explain a mental state’s being conscious in terms of the mental state’s being represented by another mental state. First-Order Representational theories of consciousness — FORs — primarily seek to explain a property’s being phenomenal in terms of the property being represented in experience. Despite differences in both explanans and explananda, HORs and FORs share a reliance on there being such a property as being represented. In this paper I develop an argument — the Unicorn Argument — against both HORs and FORs. The core of the Unicorn is that since there are mental rep- resentations of things that do not exist, there cannot be any such prop- erty as being represented, and thus no such property with which to identify either being conscious or being phenomenal.
 
Mandik, Pete (ms). Ch 3. beware the unicorn: Consciousness, intentionality, and inexistence.   (Google)
Abstract: 0. Introduction As mentioned in chapter 0, HORs seek to explain a mental state’s being conscious in terms of the mental state’s being represented by another mental state and FORs seek to explain a property’s being phenomenal in terms of the property of being represented in experience. Despite differences in both explanans and explananda, HORs and FORs share a reliance on there being such a property as being represented. In this chapter I develop an argument—the Unicorn Argument—against both HORs and FORs. The gist of the Unicorn is that since there are mental representations of things that do not exist, there cannot be any such property as being represented upon which to erect a theory of consciousness. While I think many varieties of HORs and FORs are vulnerable to the Unicorn, in this chapter I target just a few exemplars: David Rosenthal’s Higher-Order Thought theory (HOT) and the FORs developed by Fred Dretske and Michael Tye. Although HORs and FORs were discussed in previous chapters, insufficient detail has been given so far to make it clear how HOT will be vulnerable to the Unicorn. In section 1 I spell out HOT, emphasizing its main motivations and its reliance on the notion of being represented
 
Manson, Neil Campbell (2001). The limitations and costs of Lycan's 'simple' argument. Analysis 61 (4):319-323.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 






 
Matey, Jennifer (2006). Two HOTS to handle: The concept of state consciousness in the higher-order thought theory of consciousness. Philosophical Psychology 19 (2):151-175.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: David Rosenthal's higher-order thought (HOT) theory is one of the most widely argued for of the higher-order accounts of consciousness. I argue that Rosenthal vacillates between two models of the HOT theory. First, I argue that these models employ different concepts of 'state consciousness'; the two concepts each refer to mental state tokens, but in virtue of different properties. In one model, the concept of 'state consciousness' is more consistent with how the term is typically used, both by philosophers and scientists, and in commonsense usage. This model, however, also has its problems. In the second part of the paper, I develop a modified version of Rosenthal's transitivity principle, thereby avoiding some complications that stem from the original transitivity principle. I suggest that Rosenthal occasionally employs this modified model himself, and that the inconsistency identified in the first section of this paper might really reflect Rosenthal's vacillation between these two versions of the transitivity principle. I offer one explanation for how this equivocation may have occurred. These two versions would result if articulations of the transitivity principle employed the term 'mental state' inconsistently, to refer on some occasions merely to mental state types, and on others, to tokened mental states. I conclude by arguing, contrary to Rosenthal and others, that the theory is not incompatible with view that conscious states are uniquely casual efficacious







 
Mellor, D. H. (1980). Consciousness and degrees of belief. In D. H. Mellor (ed.), Prospects for Pragmatism. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 11 | Google) 
 
Mellor, D. H. (1978). Conscious belief. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 78 (March):87-101.   (Cited by 17 | Annotation | Google)




  
Minissale, Gregory (2009). Enacting Higher Order Thoughts: Velazquez and Las Meninas. Journal of Consciousness Studies 16 (2-3):165-89.   (Google)
Abstract: This paper bridges art history and consciousness studies and investigates the network of gazes and frames in Las Meninas and how this engages with a system of higher-order thoughts and reflexive operations.
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1992). Are all instances of phenomenal experience conscious in the sense of their being objects of inner (second-order) consciousness? American Journal of Psychology 105:605-12.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1992). Appendage theory -- pro and con. Journal of Mind and Behavior 13 (4):371-96.   (Cited by 7 | Annotation | Google)




  
Natsoulas, Thomas (1993). The importance of being conscious. Journal of Mind and Behavior 14 (4):317-40.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google)




  
Natsoulas, Thomas (1993). What is wrong with the appendage theory of consciousness? Philosophical Psychology 6 (2):137-54.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google)





Abstract: The present article distinguishes three kinds of accounts of direct (reflective) awareness (i.e. awareness of one's mental occurrences causally unmediated by any other mental occurrence): mental-eye theory, self-intimational theory and appendage theory. These aim to explain the same phenomenon, though each proposes that direct (reflective) awareness occurs in a fundamentally different way. Also, I address a crucial problem that appendage theory must solve: how does a direct (reflective) awareness succeed in being awareness specifically of the particular mental-occurrence instance that is its object? Appendage theory is singled out for this attention because psychologists, as they embark on their renewed study of consciousness, are most likely to be attracted by appendage theory for their explanation of direct (reflective) awareness
 
Nelkin, Norton (1995). The dissociation of phenomenal states from apperception. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Ferdinand Schoningh.   (Cited by 7 | Annotation | Google)




  
Nelkin, Norton (1989). Unconscious sensations. Philosophical Psychology 2 (March):129-41.   (Cited by 22 | Annotation | Google)




  
Nguyen, A. Minh (2000). On a Searlean objection to Rosenthal's theory of state-consciousness. Journal of Philosophical Research 25 (January):83-100.   (Google) 
 
O'Brien, Gerard & Opie, Jonathan (1999). What's really doing the work here? Knowledge representation or the higher-order thought theory of consciousness? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22 (5):778-779.   (Google)
Abstract: Dienes & Perner offer us a theory of explicit and implicit knowledge that promises to systematise a large and diverse body of research in cognitive psychology. Their advertised strategy is to unpack this distinction in terms of explicit and implicit representation. But when one digs deeper one finds the “Higher-Order Thought” theory of consciousness doing much of the work. This reduces both the plausibility and usefulness of their account. We think their strategy is broadly correct, but that consensus on the explicit/implicit knowledge distinction is still a fair way off
 
O'Dea, John (ms). A higher-order, dispositional theory of qualia.   (Google) 
 
Pharoah, Mark (ms). Enhancing dispositional higher-order thought theory.   (Google)
Abstract: Through the utilization of a descriptive illustration and detailed referencing of Carruthers (2000), a comparison of Hierarchical Systems theory (Pharoah, 2007) with Dispositional Higher-Order Thought theory identifies and reinforces their complementary status. However, this also determines some key distinctions, particularly with regard to the conclusions each make regarding the mentality of animals and the autistic, and regarding the moral consequences of these conclusions.
 
Prinz, Jesse J. (2000). A neurofunctional theory of visual consciousness. Consciousness and Cognition 9 (2):243-59.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper develops an empirically motivated theory of visual consciousness. It begins by outlining neuropsychological support for Jackendoff's (1987) hypothesis that visual consciousness involves mental representations at an intermediate level of processing. It then supplements that hypothesis with the further requirement that attention, which can come under the direction of high level representations, is also necessary for consciousness. The resulting theory is shown to have a number of philosophical consequences. If correct, higher-order thought accounts, the multiple drafts account, and the widely held belief that sensation precedes perception will all be found wanting. The theory will also be used to illustrate and defend a methodology that fills the gulf between functionalists who ignore the brain and neural reductionists who repudiate functionalism






 
Radovic, Susanna (online). Watching representations.   (Google)
Abstract: One kind of substantial critique which has been raised by several philosophers against the so called higher order perception theory (HOP), advocated for mainly by William Lycan, concerns the combination of two important claims: (i) that qualia are wide contents of perceptual experiences, and (ii) that the subject becomes aware of what the world is like (to her) by perceiving her own experiences of the world. In what sense could we possibly watch our own mental states if they are representations whose content and qualitative character is determined by factors that are external to the mind? Here I will do my best in order to understand this claim
 
Rey, Georges (2000). Role, not content: Comments on David Rosenthal's "consciousness, content, and metacognitive judgments". Consciousness and Cognition 9 (2):224-230.   (Google) 
 
Ridge, Michael (2001). Taking solipsism seriously: Nonhuman animals and meta-cognitive theories of consciousness. Philosophical Studies 103 (3):315-340.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 




 
Robinson, William S. (2004). A few thoughts too many? In Rocco J. Gennaro (ed.), Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness: An Anthology. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Robinson, William S. (1999). A theory of phenomenal consciousness? Psyche 5 (4).   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Rolls, Edmund T. (2004). A higher order syntactic thought (HOST) theory of consciousness. In Rocco J. Gennaro (ed.), Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness: An Anthology. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Rolls, Edmund T. (2008). Emotion, higher-order syntactic thoughts, and consciousness. In Lawrence Weiskrantz & Martin Davies (eds.), Frontiers of Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Rolls, Edmund T. (2007). The affective neuroscience of consciousness: Higher order syntactic thoughts, dual routes to emotion and action, and consciousness. In Philip David Zelazo, Morris Moscovitch & Evan Thompson (eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Consciousness. Cambridge.   (Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (1997). Apperception, sensation, and dissociability. Mind and Language 2 (2):206-23.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Recent writing on consciousness has increasingly stressed ways in which the terms









 
Rosenthal, David M. (1997). A theory of consciousness. In Ned Block, Owen J. Flanagan & Guven Guzeldere (eds.), The Nature of Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Cited by 166 | Annotation | Google)




  
Rosenthal, David, Commentaries.   (Google)
Abstract: But there is another reason, equally important. We distinguish among thoughts, feelings, and sensations by virtue of their characteristic representational properties. In particular, we describe thoughts and emotions in terms of the things they are about and how they represent those things. And we characterize sensations by reference to their qualitative properties and the things..
 
Rosenthal, David M., Consciousness (.   (Google)
Abstract: (1) Most commonly these terms are used to describe people. People and other creatures are conscious if they are awake and responsive to sensory stimulation. Because this is a property of creatures, we can call it creature consciousness. An individual lacks such consciousness if it is asleep, in a coma, anesthetized, and so forth. Creature consciousness demands a mainly biological explanation, as against an explanation in mainly psychological terms
 
Rosenthal, David (web). Concepts and definitions of consciousness. In P W. Banks (ed.), Encyclopedia of Consciousness. Elsevier.   (Google)
Abstract: in Encyclopedia of Consciousness, ed. William P. Banks, Amsterdam: Elsevier, forthcoming in 2009
 
Rosenthal, David M. (2002). Consciousness and higher-order thought. In L. Nagel (ed.), Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science. Macmillan.   (Cited by 11 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The problem of consciousness is to say what it is for some of our thoughts, feelings, and sensations to be conscious, given that others are not. This is different from saying what it is for a person to be conscious or not conscious. Even when people are conscious, many of their thoughts and sensations typically are not. And there's nothing problematic about a person's being conscious; it's just the person's being awake and responsive to sensory input





 
Rosenthal, David (ms). Consciousness and intrinsic higher-order content.   (Google)
Abstract: PowerPoint presentation at Tucson VII, Toward a Science of Consciousness 2006, session on Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness
 
Rosenthal, David M. (1998). Consciousness and metacognition. In Dan Sperber (ed.), Metarepresentation. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 16 | Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (2005). Consciousness and Mind. Oxford: Clarendon Press.   (Cited by 32 | Google | More links) 





 
Rosenthal, David M. (2000). Consciousness, content, and metacognitive judgments. Consciousness And Cognition 9 (2):203-214.   (Cited by 20 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Because metacognition consists in our having mental access to our cognitive states and mental states are conscious only when we are conscious of them in some suitable way, metacognition and consciousness shed important theoretical light on one another. Thus, our having metacognitive access to information carried by states that are not conscious helps con?rm the hypothesis that a mental state









 
Rosenthal, David M. (2000). Consciousness, interpretation, and consciousness. Protosociology 14:67-84.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (2002). Explaining Consciousness. In David J. Chalmers (ed.), Philosophy of Mind: Classical and Contemporary Readings. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 28 | Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (1993). Explaining consciousness. In David J. Chalmers (ed.), Philosophy of Mind: Contemporary Readings. Oup.   (Cited by 28 | Annotation | Google)




  
Rosenthal, David (2010). Expressing one's mind. Acta Analytica 25 (1).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Remarks such as ‘I am in pain’ and ‘I think that it’s raining’ are puzzling, since they seem to literally describe oneself as being in pain or having a particular thought, but their conditions of use tend to coincide with unequivocal expressions of pain or of that thought. This led Wittgenstein, among others, to treat such remarks as expressing, rather than as reporting, one’s mental states. Though such expressivism is widely recognized as untenable, Bar-On has recently advanced a neo-expressivist view, on which such remarks exhibit characteristics of both expressions of mental states and reports of those states. I argue against any attempt to see such remarks as both reporting and expressing the same mental states, and that a correct account rests on distinguishing the truth conditions of such remarks from their conditions of use





 
Rosenthal, David M. (2002). How many kinds of consciousness? Consciousness and Cognition 11 (4):653-665.   (Cited by 18 | Google | More links) 







 
Rosenthal, David M. (1993). Higher-order thoughts and the appendage theory of consciousness. Philosophical Psychology 6 (2):155-66.   (Cited by 15 | Annotation | Google)





Abstract: Theories of what it is for a mental state to be conscious must answer two questions. We must say how we're conscious of our conscious mental states. And we must explain why we seem to be conscious of them in a way that's immediate. Thomas Natsoulas (1993) distinguishes three strategies for explaining what it is for mental states to be conscious. I show that the differences among those strategies are due to the divergent answers they give to the foregoing questions. Natsoulas finds most promising the strategy that amounts to the higher-order-thought hypothesis that I've defended elsewhere. But he raises a difficulty for it, which he thinks probably can be met only by modifying that strategy. I argue that this is unnecessary. The difficulty is a special case of a general question, the answer to which is independent of any issues about consciousness. So it's no part of a theory of consciousness to address the problem, much less solve it. Moreover, the difficulty seems to have intuitive force only given the picture that underlies the other two explanatory strategies, which both Natsoulas and I reject
 
Rosenthal, David & Weisberg, Josh (online). Higher-order theories of consciousness.   (Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (2000). Metacognition and higher-order thoughts. Consciousness and Cognition 9 (2):231-242.   (Cited by 14 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Because there is a fair amount of overlap in the points by Balog and Rey, I will organize this response topically, referring speciﬁcally to each commentator as rele- vant. And, because much of the discussion focuses on my higher-order-thought (HOT) hypothesis independent of questions about metacognition, I will begin by addressing a cluster of issues that have to do with the status, motivation, and exact formulation of that hypothesis







 
Rosenthal, David M. (1993). Multiple drafts and higher-order thoughts. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 53 (4):911-18.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 




 
Rosenthal, David M. (1995). Multiple drafts and the facts of the matter. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Ferdinand Schoningh.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google)




  
Rosenthal, David M. (1995). Moore's paradox and consciousness. Philosophical Perspectives 9:313-33.   (Cited by 16 | Google | More links) 





 
Rosenthal, David M. (1997). Perceptual and cognitive models of consciousness. Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association 45.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (1997). Phenomenal consciousness and what it's like. Behavioral And Brain Sciences 20 (1):64-65.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: be realized. Whatever gets access to phenomenal awareness (to consciousness and P-consciousness are almost always present or P-consciousness as described by Block) is represented within this absent together.






 
Rosenthal, David (online). Reflections on five questions: Autobiographical and disciplinary.   (Google)
Abstract: in Mind and Consciousness: Five Questions, ed. Patrick Grim, New York and London: Automatic Press, forthcoming
 
Rosenthal, David (online). “Replies to Galen Strawson and Ned Block.   (Google)
Abstract: (not intended for publication), Replies to Strawson and Block in Colloquium at the CUNY Graduate Center, December 13, 2006
 
Rosenthal, David M. (1994). State consciousness and transitive consciousness. Consciousness and Cognition 2 (3):355-63.   (Cited by 25 | Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (2004). Subjective character and reflexive content. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 68 (1):191-198.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: I. Zombies and the Knowledge Argument John Perry






 
Rosenthal, David M. (online). State consciousness and what it's like.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (2005). Sensory qualities, consciousness, and perception. In Consciousness and Mind. Clarendon Press.   (Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (1986). Two concepts of consciousness. Philosophical Studies 49 (May):329-59.   (Cited by 215 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Rosenthal, David M. (2002). The higher-order model of consciousness. In Rita Carter (ed.), Consciousness. Weidenfeld & Nicolson.   (Google)
Abstract: All mental states, including thoughts, feelings, perceptions, and sensations, often occur consciously. But they all occur also without being conscious. So the first thing a theory of consciousness must do is explain the difference between thoughts, feelings, perceptions, and sensations that are conscious and those which are not
 
Rosenthal, David M. (1991). The independence of consciousness and sensory quality. Philosophical Issues 1:15-36.   (Cited by 42 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Rosenthal, David (online). The mind and its expression.   (Google)
Abstract: MS., for an Eastern Division APA Author-Meets-Critics Session on Dorit Bar-On, Speaking My Mind: Expression and Self-Knowledge, Baltimore, December 2007
 
Rosenthal, David M. (1993). Thinking that one thinks. In Martin Davies & Glyn W. Humphreys (eds.), Consciousness: Psychological and Philosophical Essays. Blackwell.   (Cited by 111 | Annotation | Google)




  
Rosenthal, David, V. consciousness, interpretation, and higher-order-thought.   (Google)
Abstract: Few contemporary researchers in psychology, philosophy, and the cognitive sciences have any doubt about whether mental phenomena occur without being conscious. There is extensive and convincing clinical and experimental evidence for the existence of thoughts, desires, and related mental states that aren’t conscious. We characterize thoughts, desires, intentions, expectations, hopes, and many other mental states in terms of the things they are about and, more fully, in terms of their content, as captured by a sentence nominalization, such as a clause beginning with the word ‘that’. The philosophical literature follows Franz Brentano’s adaptation of Thomist terminology in referring to all such states as intentional states. But there is another type of mental phenomena, which lack intentionality and whose mental nature consists instead of some qualitative feature. These states include bodily sensations, such as aches and pains, and perceptual states, such as visual sensations of color and tactile sensations of heat and cold. And these states all exhibit some mental quality or another, such as the mental quality distinctive of pain or the mental quality of red or blue.1 And even theorists who acknowledge that intentional states can and do occur without being conscious have sometimes insisted that qualitative states cannot. There is, according to these theorists, nothing to a state’s being qualitative or exhibiting some mental quality unless that state is conscious – unless it is, as we might metaphorically say, “lighted up”. It’s striking that Freud himself seems to have adopted this double standard toward the two types of mental state. In his metapsychological paper, “The Unconscious”, for example, he writes that “all the categories which we employ to describe conscious mental acts, such as ideas, purposes, resolutions, and so forth, can be applied to [unconscious mental occurrences]” (Freud 1915e, p. 168). But he seems here to have in..
 
Rosenthal, David (2004). Varieties of higher-order theory. In Rocco J. Gennaro (ed.), Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness: An Anthology. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 16 | Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (1990). Why are verbally expressed thoughts conscious? Bielefeld Report.   (Cited by 10 | Annotation | Google)




  
Rowlands, Mark (2001). Consciousness and higher-order thoughts. Mind and Language 16 (3):290-310.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links) 








 
Saha, Sukharanjan (2003). Inner sense and 'higher order consciousness': An indian perspective. In Perspectives on Consciousness. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.   (Google) 
 
Saidel, Eric (1999). Consciousness without awareness? Psyche 5 (16).   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Sainsbury, Mark (1991). Is there higher-order vagueness? Philosophical Quarterly 41 (163):167-182.   (Google | More links) 




 
Schroder, Jurgen (2001). Higher-order thought and naturalist accounts of consciousness. Journal Of Consciousness Studies 8 (11):27-46.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Seager, William E. (2004). A cold look at HOT theory. In Rocco J. Gennaro (ed.), Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness: An Anthology. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Seager, William E. (online). Dispositions and consciousness.   (Google | More links) 




 
Seager, William E. (1994). Dretske on HOT theories of consciousness. Analysis 54 (4):270-76.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Seager, William E. (1999). HOT theory: The mentalistic reduction of consciousness. In Theories of Consciousness: An Introduction and Assessment. Routledge.   (Google) 
 
Seager, William E. (ms). On dispositional HOT theories of consciousness.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: Higher Order Thought (HOT) theories of consciousness contend that consciousness can be explicated in terms of a relation between mental states of different
 
Shapiro, Lawrence A. (1999). Saving the phenomenal. Psyche 5 (35).   (Google) 
 
Stoerig, Petra (1997). Phenomenal vision and apperception: Evidence from blindsight. Mind and Language 2 (2):224-37.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 








 
Stone, Jim (2001). What is it like to have an unconscious mental state? Philosophical Studies 104 (2):179-202.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 





 
Van Gulick, Robert (2000). Is the higher order of linguistic thought model of feeling adequate? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 23 (2):218-219.   (Google)
Abstract: Despite its explanatory value, the “higher order linguistic thought” model comes up short as an account of the felt aspect of motivational states
 
Veres, Zoltan (2008). Hiding within representation. Journal of Consciousness Studies 15 (9):131-135.   (Google)
Abstract: The 'playful affirmation', as Uziel Awret calls it, turns into a joyful affirmation of a theoretical challenge in a philosophical space set up by the many questions concerning the nature of consciousness. This is especially because the 'Las Meninas and the search for self-representation' (Awret, this volume) has been written in the spirit of an interplay between different modes and approaches, and also the different philosophical traditions, for dealing with the 'enigma' it presents. Bringing Velasquez's Las Meninas into the bigger picture of consciousness studies means a change in methodological perspective. Not only does it support the idea so dear to the tradition of phenomenology and philosophical hermeneutics of claiming back the truth value for the experience of work of art, but the author also succeeds in showing the relevance of this 'truth' to recent theoretical approaches to problems of representationalism and self-representation (like those of David Rosenthal, Robert Van Gulick, Bruce Mangan and Uriah Kriegel, for example)
 
Weisberg, Josh (1999). Active, thin, and HOT: An actualist response to Carruthers' dispositionalist HOT view. Psyche 5 (6).   (Cited by 2 | Google)
Abstract: Carruthers proposes that for a mental state to be conscious (state consciousness), it must be present in a
 
Weisberg, Josh (2008). Same old, same old: The same-order representational theory of consciousness and the division of phenomenal labor. Synthese 160 (2):161-181.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The same-order representation theory of consciousness holds that conscious mental states represent both the world and themselves. This complex representational structure is posited in part to avoid a powerful objection to the more traditional higher-order representation theory of consciousness. The objection contends that the higher-order theory fails to account for the intimate relationship that holds between conscious states and our awareness of them--the theory 'divides the phenomenal labor' in an illicit fashion. This 'failure of intimacy' is exposed by the possibility of misrepresentation by higher-order states. In this paper, I argue that despite appearances, the same-order theory fails to avoid the objection, and thus also has troubles with intimacy





 
Weisberg, Josh (forthcoming). Misrepresenting consciousness. Philosophical Studies.   (Google)
Abstract: An important objection to the “higher-order” theory of consciousness turns on the possibility of higher-order misrepresentation. I argue that the objection fails because it illicitly assumes a characterization of consciousness explicitly rejected by HO theory. This in turn raises the question of what justifies an initial characterization of the data a theory of consciousness must explain. I distinguish between intrinsic and extrinsic characterizations of consciousness, and I propose several desiderata a successful characterization of consciousness must meet. I then defend the particular extrinsic characterization of the HO theory, the “transitivity principle,” against its intrinsic rivals, thereby showing that the misrepresentation objection conclusively falls short
 
Weisberg, Josh (2001). The appearance of unity: A higher-order interpretation of the unity of consciousness. Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual Conference of The.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: subjective appearance of unity, but respects unity can be adequately dealt with by the theory. I the actual and potential disunity of the brain will close by briefly considering some worries about processes that underwrite consciousness. eliminativism that often accompany discussions of unity and consciousness





 
Wright, Wayne (2005). Distracted drivers and unattended experience. Synthese 144 (1):41-68.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Consider the much-discussed case of the distracted driver, who is alleged to successfully navigate his car for miles despite being completely oblivious to his visual states. Perhaps he is deeply engrossed in the music playing over the radio or in philosophical reflection, and as a result he goes about unaware of the scene unfolding before him on the road. That the distracted driver has visual experiences of which he is not aware is a possibility that first-order representationalists (FOR) happily accept, but higher-order representationalists (HOR) steadfastly deny. HOR claims that perceptual states become conscious only as the object of higher-order states; perceptual states are not intrinsically conscious. According to HOR, since the driver is supposed to be completely distracted by other cognitive tasks, he cannot form higher-order representations of his visual states, with the result that those states are disqualified as experiences.1 HOR theories have come in two flavors, those that claim that the relevant higher-order representations are thought-like (HOT) and those that that rely on an inner perception-like mechanism that is directed toward one









 
1.4a.4 Self-Representational Theories of Consciousness




Brentano, Franz Clemens (1874). Psychology From an Empirical Standpoint. Routledge.   (Google) 
 
Brogaard, Berit (ms). Are conscious states conscious in virtue of representing Themselves?   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This is an excellent book, one of the best I have read on consciousness in recent years. It is rigorously argued and contains interesting suggestions as to how to solve the mystery of consciousness. Following the standard literature, Uriah Kriegel takes consciousness to be the "what it is like for me"-ness of conscious mental states. This is also what is sometimes called the 'phenomenal character' of conscious mental states. For Kriegel (as for Levine), phenomenal character has two components: qualitative character and subjective character. If I have a red experience, the phenomenal redness of my experience is the qualitative character of my experience, whereas the for-me-ness is the subjective character of the experience. Kriegel states that the qualitative character of conscious mental states is what makes the conscious mental state the kind of conscious experience it is, whereas the for-me-ness of the mental state is what makes the mental state a conscious state in the first place. The mystery of consciousness, he says, does not lie in the qualitative character of experience. According to him, the question of how brain processes can give rise to purely qualitative redness is no harder to answer than that of how physical matter can instantiate colors. The mystery of consciousness lies in the for-me-ness of conscious experience. Kriegel then goes on to give an account of the subjective character of 
conscious mental states. He argues that the subjective character of conscious mental states 
consists in the state representing itself. It's the self-representational nature of conscious mental 
states that makes them conscious. The self-representational nature of conscious mental states is 
a kind of peripheral awareness. If I have a red experience, I am focally aware of redness but I 
am peripherally aware of the experience itself. Along the way Kriegel rebuts a number of 
alternative theories of subjective character: among others, that it is a kind of primitive property 
of conscious mental states, and that it is a representation of the conscious mental state by a 
higher-order state. I agree with many of Kriegel's arguments against both the naive primitivist 
view and the higher-order theoretical approach. My main concerns lie elsewhere. My three 
main points of disagreement can be summarized as follows: (1) Assuming that it makes sense to 
separate qualitative and subjective character I believe that the qualitative character of conscious 
mental states is at least as mysterious as the subjective character. (2) I believe Uriah's theory is 
at odds with plausible gradability theories of perception. (3) I am skeptical about the project of 
developing a reductive metaphysical theory of consciousness in terms of self-representation.






 
Brook, Andrew & Raymont, Paul (forthcoming). A Unified Theory of Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
Brook, Andrew (2006). Kant: A unified representational base for all consciousness. In Uriah Kriegel & Kenneth Williford (eds.), Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
Carruthers, Peter (2005). Consciousness: Essays From a Higher-Order Perspective. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 12 | Google | More links) 







 
Carruthers, Peter (2000). Phenomenal Consciousness: A Naturalistic Theory. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 194 | Google | More links)
Abstract: How can phenomenal consciousness exist as an integral part of a physical universe? How can the technicolour phenomenology of our inner lives be created out of the complex neural activities of our brains? Many have despaired of finding answers to these questions; and many have claimed that human consciousness is inherently mysterious. Peter Carruthers argues, on the contrary, that the subjective feel of our experience is fully explicable in naturalistic (scientifically acceptable) terms. Drawing on a variety of interdisciplinary resources, he develops and defends a novel account in terms of higher-order thought. He shows that this can explain away some of the more extravagant claims made about phenomenal consciousness, while substantively explaining the key subjectivity of our experience. Written with characteristic clarity and directness, and surveying a wide range of extant theories, this book is essential reading for all those within philosophy and psychology interested in the problem of consciousness

















 
Caston, Victor (2002). Aristotle on consciousness. Mind 111 (444):751-815.   (Cited by 19 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Aristotle's discussion of perceiving that we perceive (On the Soul 3.2) has points of contact with two contemporary debates about consciousness: the first over whether consciousness is an intrinsic feature of mental states or a higher-order thought or perception; the second concerning the qualitative nature of experience. In both cases, Aristotle's views cut down the middle of an apparent dichotomy, in a way that does justice to each set of intuitions, while avoiding their attendant difficulties. With regard to the first issue?the primary focus of this paper?he argues that consciousness is both intrinsic and higher-order, due to its reflexive nature. This, in turn, has consequences for the second issue, where again Aristotle seeks out the middle ground. He is committed against qualia in any strong sense of the term. Yet he also holds that the phenomenal quality of experience is not exhausted by its representational content






 
Caston, Victor (2006). Comment on Amie Thomasson's "self-awareness and self-knowledge". Psyche 12 (2).   (Google)
Abstract: In this paper, I raise an objection to Thomasson
 
Caston, Victor (2004). More on Aristotle on consciousness: Reply to Sisko. Mind 113 (451):523-533.   (Google | More links) 




 
Coventry, Angela & Kriegel, Uriah (2008). Locke on consciousness. History of Philosophy Quarterly 25:221-242.   (Google) 
 
Drummond, John J. (2006). The case(s) of (self-)awareness. In Uriah Kriegel & Kenneth Williford (eds.), Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
Falk, Arthur E. (1995). Consciousness and self-reference. Erkenntnis 43 (2):151-80.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 




 
Fasching, Wolfgang (2009). The mineness of experience. Continental Philosophy Review 42 (2):131-148.   (Google)
Abstract: In this paper I discuss the nature of the “I” (or “self”) and whether it is presupposed by the very existence of conscious experiences (as that which “has” them) or whether it is, instead, in some way constituted by them. I argue for the former view and try to show that the very nature of experience implies a non-constituted synchronic and diachronic transcendence of the experiencing “I” with regard to its experiences, an “I” which defies any objective characterization. Finally I suggest that the self, though irreducible to inter-experiential relations, is not a “separately existing entity”, but should be conceived of as a dimension , namely the dimension of first-personal manifestation of the experiences
 
Ganeri, Jonardon (1999). Self-intimation, memory and personal identity. Journal of Indian Philosophy 27 (5).   (Google) 
 
Gennaro, Rocco J. (2006). Between pure self-referentialism and the (extrinsic) HOT theory of consciousness. In Uriah Kriegel & Kenneth Williford (eds.), Consciousness and Self-Reference. MIT Press.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Gennaro, Rocco J. (2007). Representationalism, peripheral awareness, and the transparency of experience. Philosophical Studies 139 (1):39-56.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: It is often said that some kind of peripheral (or inattentional) conscious awareness accompanies our focal (attentional) consciousness. I agree that this is often the case, but clarity is needed on several fronts. In this paper, I lay out four distinct theses on peripheral awareness and show that three of them are true. However, I then argue that a fourth thesis, commonly associated with the so-called "self-representational approach to consciousness," is false. The claim here is that we have outer focal consciousness accompanied often (or even always) by inner peripheral (self-)awareness. My criticisms stem from both methodological and phenomenological considerations. In doing so, I offer a diagnosis as to why the fourth thesis has seemed true to so many and also show how the so-called "transparency of experience," frequently invoked by representationalists, is importantly relevant to my diagnosis. Finally, I respond to several objections and to further attempts to show that thesis four is true. What emerges is that if one wishes to hold that some form of self-awareness accompanies all outer-directed conscious states, one is better off holding that such self-awareness is itself unconscious, as is held for example by standard higher-order theories of consciousness.





 
Gerken, Mikkel (2008). Is there a simple argument for higher-order representation theories of awareness consciousness? Erkenntnis 69 (2):243-259.   (Google)
Abstract: William Lycan has articulated “a simple argument” for higher-order representation (HOR) theories of a variety of consciousness sometimes labeled ‘awareness consciousness’ (Lycan, Analysis 61.1, January 3–4, 2001). The purpose of this article is to critically assess the influential argument-strategy of the simple argument. I argue that, as stated, the simple argument fails since it is invalid. Moreover, I argue that an obvious “quick fix” would beg the question against competing same-order representation (SOR) theories of awareness consciousness. I then provide a reconstruction of the argument and argue that although the reconstructed argument deserves consideration, it is also too simple as stated. In particular, it raises several controversial questions about the nature of mental representation. These questions must be addressed before a verdict as to the cogency of the HOR argument-strategy can be reached. But since the questions are controversial, a cogent argument for HOR theories of awareness consciousness is unlikely to be simple
 
Harman, Gilbert (2006). Self-reflexive thoughts. Philosophical Issues 16:334-345.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Alice has insomnia. She has trouble falling asleep and part of the problem is that she worries about it and realizes that her worrying about it tends to keep from falling asleep. It occurs to her that thinking that she will not be able to fall asleep may be a kind of self-fulfilling prophecy. Perhaps she even has a thought that might be expressed like this: I am not going to fall asleep because of my having this very thought. This thought (perhaps correctly) attributes to itself the property of keeping her awake






 
Hill, Christopher S. (2006). Harman on self referential thoughts. Philosophical Issues 16 (1):346-357.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: I will be concerned in these pages with the views that Gilbert Harman puts forward in his immensely stimulating paper Self-Reflexive Thoughts.<sup>1</sup> Harman maintains that self referential thoughts are possible, and also that they are useful. I applaud both of these claims. An example of a self referential thought is the thought that every thought, including this present one, has a logical structure. I feel sure that this thought exists, for I have entertained it on a number of occasions. Moreover, I feel that it is extremely useful. Without deploying it, how could we tell the whole truth about the nature of thoughts?





 
Hill, Christopher S. (2006). Perceptual consciousness: How it opens directly onto the world, preferring the world to itself. In Uriah Kriegel & Kenneth Williford (eds.), Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
Hofstadter, Douglas R. (2006). What is it like to be a strange loop? In Uriah Kriegel & Kenneth Williford (eds.), Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
Horgan, Terence E.; Tienson, John L. & Graham, George (2006). Internal-world skepticism and mental self-presentation. In Uriah Kriegel & Kenneth Williford (eds.), Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
Hossack, Keith (2002). Self-knowledge and consciousness. Proceedings of Aristotelian Society 102 (2):168-181.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 








 
Ismael, Jenann (2006). Doublemindedness: A model for a dual content cognitive architecture. Psyche 12 (2).   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: The outstanding stumbling blocks to any reductive account of phenomenal consciousness remain the subjectivity of phenomenal properties and cognitive and epistemic gaps that plague the relationship between physical and phenomenal properties. I suggest that a deflationary interpretation of both is available to defenders of self- representational accounts
 
Janzen, Greg (2006). Phenomenal character as implicit self-awareness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (12):44-73.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: One of the more refractory problems in contemporary discussions of consciousness is the problem of determining what a mental state's being conscious consists in. This paper defends the thesis that a mental state is conscious if and only if it has a certain reflexive character, i.e., if and only if it has a structure that includes an awareness (or consciousness) of itself. Since this thesis finds one of its clearest expressions in the work of Brentano, it is his treatment of the thesis on which I initially focus, though I subsequently bring in Sartre where he is required to improve on Brentano, i.e., where he addresses himself to an important point not considered by Brentano. As part of this investigation, the paper also, more specifically, aims to exhibit as perspicuously as possible the relationship between self-awareness and the phenomenal, or 'what-it- is-like', dimension of conscious experience. I attempt to show, in particular, that the phenomenal character of at least perceptual consciousness can be fully explained in terms of self- awareness, i.e., in terms of a low-level or 'implicit' self- awareness that is built into every conscious perceptual state






 
Janzen, Greg (2005). Self-Consciousness and Phenomenal Character. Dialogue 44 44:707-733.   (Google) 
 
Kapitan, Tomis (1999). The ubiquity of self-awareness. Grazer Philosophische Studien 57:17-44.   (Cited by 6 | Google)
Abstract: Two claims have been prominent in recent discussions of self-consciousness. One is that first-person reference or first-person thinking is irreducible (the Irreducibility Thesis), and the other is that an awareness of self accompanies all conscious states, at least those through which one refers to something. The latter--here termed the Ubiquity Thesis--has long been associated with philosophers like Fichte, Brentano, and Sartre, though each articulated his own version of the claim. More recently, variants have been defended by Dieter Henrich (1970) and Manfred Frank (1991, 1995a, 1995b). In Frank's words
 
Kidd, Chad (forthcoming). Phenomenal consciousness with infallible self-representation. Philosophical Studies.   (Google)
Abstract: In this paper, I argue against the claim recently defended by Josh Weisberg that a certain version of the self-representational approach to phenomenal consciousness cannot avoid a set of problems that have plagued higher-order approaches. These problems arise specifically for theories that allow for higher-order misrepresentation or—in the domain of self-representational theories—self-misrepresentation. In response to Weisberg, I articulate a self-representational theory of phenomenal consciousness according to which it is contingently impossible for self-representations tokened in the context of a conscious mental state to misrepresent their objects. This contingent infallibility allows the theory to both acknowledge the (logical) possibility of self-misrepresentation and avoid the problems of self-misrepresentation. Expanding further on Weisberg’s work, I consider and reveal the shortcomings of three other self-representational models—put forward by Kreigel, Van Gulick, and Gennaro—in order to show that each indicates the need for this sort of infallibility. I then argue that contingent infallibility is in principle acceptable on naturalistic grounds only if we attribute (1) a neo-Fregean kind of directly referring, indexical content to self-representational mental states and (2) a certain ontological structure to the complex conscious mental states of which these indexical self-representations are a part. In these sections I draw on ideas from the work of Perry and Kaplan to articulate the context-dependent semantic structure of inner-representational states
 
Kobes, Bernard W. (1995). Telic higher-order thoughts and Moore's paradox. Philosophical Perspectives 9:291-312.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 





 
Kriegel, Uriah (2007). A cross-order integration hypothesis for the neural correlate of consciousness. Consciousness & Cognition 16:897-912.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: b>. One major problem many hypotheses regarding the neural correlate of consciousness (NCC) face is what we might call “the why question”: _why _would this particular neural feature, rather than another, correlate with consciousness? The purpose of the present paper is to develop an NCC hypothesis that answers this question. The proposed hypothesis is inspired by the Cross-Order Integration (COI) theory of consciousness, according to which consciousness arises from the functional integration of a first-order representation of an external stimulus and a second-order representation of that first-order representation. The proposal comes in two steps. The first step concerns the “general shape” of the NCC and can be directly derived from COI theory. The second step is a concrete hypothesis that can be arrived at by combining the general shape with empirical considerations





 
Kriegel, Uriah (2003). Consciousness as intransitive self-consciousness: Two views and an argument. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 33 (1):103-132.   (Cited by 24 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The word ?consciousness? is notoriously ambiguous. This is mainly because it is not a term of art, but a mundane word we all use quite frequently, for different purposes and in different everyday contexts. In this paper, I discuss consciousness in one specific sense of the word. To avoid the ambiguities, I introduce a term of art ? intransitive self-consciousness ? and suggest that this form of self-consciousness is an essential component of the folk notion of consciousness. I then argue for a specific account of consciousness as intransitive self-consciousness. According to this account, a mental state is conscious (i.e., intransitively self-conscious) iff it represents its own occurrence. The argument is a ?modernizing? modification of an older argument due to Aristotle and Brentano





 
Kriegel, Uriah (2003). Consciousness, higher-order content, and the individuation of vehicles. Synthese 134 (3):477-504.   (Cited by 19 | Google | More links)
Abstract: One of the distinctive properties of conscious states is the peculiar self- awareness implicit in them. Two rival accounts of this self-awareness are discussed. According to a Neo-Brentanian account, a mental state M is conscious iff M represents its very own occurrence. According to the Higher-Order Monitoring account, M is merely accompanied by a numerically distinct representation of its occurrence. According to both, then, M is conscious in virtue of ﬁguring in a higher-order content. The disagreement is over the question whether the higher-order content is carried by M itself or by a differ- ent state. While the Neo-Brentanian theory is phenomenologically more attractive, it is often felt to be somewhat mysterious. It is argued (i) that the difference between the Neo- Brentanian and Higher-Order Monitoring theories is smaller and more empirical than may initially seem, and (ii) that the Neo-Brentanian theory can be readily demystiﬁed. These considerations make it prima facie preferable to the Higher-Order Monitoring theory.










 
Kriegel, Uriah (2002). Consciousness, permanent self-awareness, and higher-order monitoring. Dialogue 41 (3):517-540.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Kriegel, Uriah (2003). Intrinsic theory and the content of inner awareness. Journal of Mind and Behavior 24 (2):169-196.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Kriegel, Uriah (2004). Moore's paradox and the structure of conscious belief. Erkenntnis 61 (1):99-121.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links) 








 
Kriegel, Uriah (2005). Naturalizing subjective character. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 71 (1):23-57.   (Cited by 15 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Abstract. When I have a conscious experience of the sky, there is a bluish way it is like for me to have that experience. We may distinguish two aspects of this "bluish way it is like for me": (i) the bluish aspect and (ii) the for-me aspect. Let us call the bluish aspect of the experience its qualitative character and the for-me aspect its subjective character. What is this elusive for-me-ness, or subjective character, of conscious experience? In this paper, I examine six different attempts to account for subjective character in terms of the functional and representational properties of conscious experiences. After arguing against the first five, I defend the sixth








 
Kriegel, Uriah (2005). Naturalizing Subjective Character. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 71:23-57.   (Google)
Abstract: When I have an experience of the blue sky, there is a bluish it is like for me to have the experience. There are two components to this “bluish way it is like for me”: the bluish component, which I call qualitative character; and the for-me component, which I call subjective character. The paper examines six options for naturalizing subjective character.
 
Horgan, Terry & Kriegel, Uriah (2007). Phenomenal epistemology: What is consciousness that we may know it so well? Philosophical Issues 17 (1):123-144.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: It has often been thought that our knowledge of ourselves is _different_ from, perhaps in some sense _better_ than, our knowledge of things other than ourselves. Indeed, there is a thriving research area in epistemology dedicated to seeking an account of self-knowledge that would articulate and explain its difference from, and superiority over, other knowledge. Such an account would thus illuminate the descriptive and normative difference between self-knowledge and other knowledge.<sup>1</sup> At the same time, self- knowledge has also encountered its share of skeptics – philosophers who refuse to accord it any descriptive, let alone normative, distinction. In this paper, we argue that there is at least one _species_ of self-knowledge that is different from, and better than, other knowledge. It is a specific kind of knowledge of one’s concurrent phenomenal experiences. Call knowledge of one’s own phenomenal experiences _phenomenal knowledge_. Our claim is that some (though not all) phenomenal knowledge is different from, and better than, non-phenomenal knowledge. In other





 
Kriegel, Uriah (forthcoming). Precis of Subjective Consciousness: A Self-Representational Theory. Philosophical Studies.   (Google)
Abstract: This is a Precis of my book _Subjective Consciousness: A Self-Representational Theory_. It does the usual.
 
Kriegel, Uriah (2009). Self-representationalism and phenomenology. Philosophical Studies 143 (3):357-381.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: To a first approximation, self-representationalism is the view that a mental state M is phenomenally conscious just in case M represents itself in the appropriate way. Proponents of self-representationalism seem to think that the phenomenology of ordinary conscious experience is on their side, but opponents seem to think the opposite. In this paper, I consider the phenomenological merits and demerits of self-representationalism. I argue that there is phenomenological evidence in favor of self-representationalism, and rather more confidently, that there is no phenomenological evidence against self-representationalism





 
Williford, Kenneth W. & Kriegel, Uriah (eds.) (2006). Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Cited by 8 | Google) 
 
Kriegel, Uriah (forthcoming). Self-Representationalism and the Explanatory Gap. In J. Liu & J. Perry (eds.), Consciousness and the Self: New Essays. Cambridge University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: According to the self-representational theory of consciousness – self- representationalism for short – a mental state is phenomenally conscious when, and only when, it represents itself in the right way. In this paper, I consider how self- representationalism might address the alleged explanatory gap between phenomenal consciousness and physical properties. I open with a presentation of self- representationalism and the case for it (§1). I then present what I take to be the most promising self-representational approach to the explanatory gap (§2). That approach is threatened, however, by an objection to self-representationalism, due to Levine, which I call the just more representation objection (§3). I close with a discussion of how the self-representationalist might approach the objection (§4).
 
Kriegel, Uriah (2006). The same-order monitoring theory of consciousness. In Uriah Kriegel & Kenneth Williford (eds.), Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links)
Abstract: One of the promising approaches to the problem of consciousness has been the Higher-Order Monitoring Theory of Consciousness. According to the Higher-Order Monitoring Theory, a mental state M of a subject S is conscious iff S has another mental state, M*, such that M* is an appropriate representation of M. Recently, several philosophers have developed a Higher-Order Monitoring theory with a twist. The twist is that M and M* are construed as entertaining some kind of constitutive relation, rather than being logically independent of each other. We may call this the Same-Order Monitoring Theory of Consciousness. In this paper, I discuss the nature of the Same-Order Monitoring Theory and argue for its superiority over the more traditional Higher-Order Monitoring Theory





 
Kriegel, Uriah (2009). Subjective Consciousness: A Self-Representational Theory. Oxford University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: The self-representational theory of consciousness -- Conceptual preliminaries -- A representational account of qualitative character -- A self-representational account of subjective character -- Self-representationalism and the phenomenology of consciousness -- Self-representationalism and the ontology of consciousness -- Self-representationalism and the science of consciousness -- Self-representationalism and the reduction of consciousness -- Appendix: phenomenal consciousness and subjective consciousness.
 
Legrand, Dorothée (2009). Two senses for 'givenness of consciousness'. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 8 (1):89-94.   (Google)
Abstract: The notion of ‘givenness of consciousness’ needs further elucidation. On the one hand, I agree with Lyyra (this volume) that one sense for ‘givenness of consciousness’ is not enough to account for consciousness and self-consciousness. On the other hand, I will argue that Lyyra’s paper is problematic precisely because he fails to consider one basic sense for ‘givenness of consciousness’. Lyyra and I thus agree that there must be (at least) two senses for ‘givenness of consciousness’; we disagree, however about which modes of givenness are involved
 
Lehrer, Keith (1996). Consciousness. In Alfred Schramm (ed.), Philosophie in Osterreich. Vienna: Verlag Holder-Pichler-Tempsky.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Lehrer, Keith (1997). Evaluation and consciousness. In Keith Lehrer (ed.), Self-Trust: A Study of Reason, Knowledge, and Autonomy. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Lehrer, Keith (2004). Representation in painting and in consciousness. Philosophical Studies 117 (1-2):1-14.   (Google | More links) 





 
Lehrer, Keith (1996). Skepticism, lucid content, and the metamental loop. In A. Clark, Jesus Ezquerro & J. M. Larrazabal (eds.), Philosophy and Cognitive Science. Kluwer.   (Google) 
 
Lehrer, Keith (2002). Self-presentation, representation, and the self. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 64 (2):412-430.   (Google | More links) 





 
Levine, Joseph (2006). Conscious awareness and (self-)representation. In Kenneth Williford & Uriah Kriegel (eds.), Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness. The Mit Press.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links) 




 
Lurz, Robert W. (2006). Conscious beliefs and desires: A same-order approach. In Uriah Kriegel & Kenneth Williford (eds.), Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
Lyyra, Pessi (2009). Two senses for 'givenness of consciousness'. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 8 (1):67-87.   (Google)
Abstract: A number of theories of consciousness define consciousness by the folk-intuition that consciousness is somehow aware of, or ‘given’ to itself. I attempt to undermine this intuition on phenomenological, conceptual and psychological grounds. An alternative, first-order theory of consciousness, however, faces the task of explaining the possibility of self-awareness for consciousness, as well as the everyday intuition supporting it. I propose that another, weaker kind of givenness, ‘givenness as availability’, is up to both of these tasks, and is therefore sufficient and suitable for first-order theories of consciousness
 
MacKenzie, Matthew D. (2007). The illumination of consciousness: Approaches to self-awareness in the indian and western traditions. Philosophy East and West 57 (1):40-62.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: : Philosophers in the Indian and Western traditions have developed and defended a range of sophisticated accounts of self-awareness. Here, four of these accounts are examined, and the arguments for them are assessed. Theories of self-awareness developed in the two traditions under consideration fall into two broad categories: reflectionist or other-illumination theories and reflexivist or self-illumination theories. Having assessed the main arguments for these theories, it is argued here that while neither reflectionist nor reflexivist theories are adequate as traditionally formulated and defended, the approaches examined here give important insights for the development of amore adequate contemporary account of self-awareness
 
Mijuskovic, Ben L. (1978). Brentano's theory of consciousness. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 38 (March):315-324.   (Google | More links) 





 
Mills, Frederick B. (2006). Intrinsic awareness in Sartre. Journal of Mind and Behavior 27 (1):1-16.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1989). An examination of four objections to self-intimating states of consciousness. Journal of Mind and Behavior 10:63-116.   (Cited by 12 | Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1988). Is any state of consciousness self-intimating? Journal of Mind and Behavior 9:167-203.   (Cited by 7 | Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1996). The case for intrinsic theory: II. An examination of a conception of consciousness 'subscript 4' as intrinsic, necessary, and concomitant. Journal of Mind and Behavior 17 (4):369-390.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (2006). The case for intrinsic theory: XIII. The role of the qualitative in a modal account of inner awareness. Journal of Mind and Behavior 27 (3-4):319-350.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (2006). The case for intrinsic theory: XII. Inner awareness conceived of as a modal character of conscious experiences. Journal of Mind and Behavior 27 (3-4):183-214.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (2004). The case for intrinsic theory IX . further discussion of an equivocal remembrance account. Journal of Mind and Behavior 25 (1):7-32.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (2004). The case for intrinsic theory XI: A disagreement regarding the kind of feature inner awareness is. Journal of Mind and Behavior 25 (3):187-211.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (2003). The case for intrinsic theory VIII: The experiential in acquiring knowledge firsthand of one's experiences. Journal of Mind and Behavior 24 (3-4):289-316.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1999). The case for intrinsic theory IV: An argument from how conscious mental-occurrence instances seem. Journal of Mind and Behavior 20 (3):257-276.   (Cited by 8 | Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (2001). The case for intrinsic theory V: Some arguments from James's varieties. Journal of Mind and Behavior 22 (1):41-67.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1996). The case for intrinsic theory: I. An introduction. Journal of Mind and Behavior 17 (3):267-286.   (Cited by 8 | Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1998). The case for intrinsic theory: III. Intrinsic inner awareness and the problem of straightforward objectivation. Journal of Mind and Behavior 19 (1):1-19.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Olivier, Abraham (2003). When pains are mental objects. Philosophical Studies 115 (1):33-53.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In Why pains are not mental objects (1998) Guy Douglasrightly argues that pains are modes rather than objects ofperceptions or sensations. In this paper I try to go a stepfurther and argue that there are circumstances when pains canbecome objects even while they remain modes of experience.By analysing cases of extreme pain as presented by Scarry,Sartre, Wiesel, Grahek and Wall, I attempt to show thatintense physical pain may evolve into a force that, likeimagination, can make our most intense state of experiencebecome a mental object. I shall finally argue that, thoughextreme pains cannot serve as paradigm cases, they do showthe general importance of taking pain states to be objects







 
Pasquerella, L. (2002). Phenomenology and intentional acts of sensing in Brentano. Southern Journal of Philosophy 40:269-279.   (Google) 
 
Perrett, Roy W. (2003). Intentionality and self-awareness. Ratio 16 (3):222-235.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 






 
Prado, C. G. (1978). Reflexive consciousness. Dialogue 17:134-137.   (Google) 
 
Raymont, Paul (online). From HOTs to self-representing states.   (Google)
Abstract: After briefly summarizing David Rosenthal
 
Rosenthal, David (ms). Consciousness and intrinsic higher-order content.   (Google)
Abstract: PowerPoint presentation at Tucson VII, Toward a Science of Consciousness 2006, session on Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness
 
Rosenthal, David (2004). Varieties of higher-order theory. In Rocco J. Gennaro (ed.), Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness: An Anthology. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 16 | Google) 
 
Rutte, Heiner (1987). On the problem of inner perception. Topoi 6 (March):19-23.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 




 
Seager, William (2006). Is self-representation necessary for consciousness? Psyche 12 (2).   (Google)
Abstract: Brook and Raymont do not assert that self-representing representations are sufficient to generate consciousness, but they do assert that they are necessary, at least in the sense that self-representation provides the most plausible mechanism for generating conscious mental states. I argue that a first-order approach to consciousness is equally capable of accounting for the putative features of consciousness which are supposed to favor the self-representational account. If nothing is gained the simplicity of the first-order theory counts in its favor. I also advance a speculative proposal that we are never aware of any distinctively mental attributes of our own states of consciousness except via an independent act of reflective conceptualization, although this goes rather farther than the first-order theory strictly requires
 
Sisko, John (2004). Reflexive awareness does belong to the main function of perception: Reply to Victor Caston. Mind 113 (451):513-521.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 




 
Smith, David Woodruff (2005). Consciousness with reflexive content. In David Woodruff Smith & Amie L. Thomasson (eds.), Phenomenology and Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Clarendon Press.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Smith, David Woodruff (2004). Return to consciousness. In David Woodruff Smith (ed.), Mind World: Essays in Phenomenology and Ontology. Cambridge University Press.   (Google) 
 
Smith, David Woodruff (1989). The Circle of Acquaintaince. Cambridge University Press.   (Google) 
 
Smith, David Woodruff (1986). The structure of (self-)consciousness. Topoi 5 (September):149-156.   (Cited by 30 | Google | More links) 




 
Textor, Mark (2006). Brentano (and some neo-brentanians) on inner consciousness. Dialectica 60 (4):411-432.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 





 
Thomasson, Amie L. (2000). After Brentano: A one-level theory of consciousness. European Journal of Philosophy 8 (2):190-210.   (Google | More links) 




 
Thompson, Brad J. (2006). Comments on Ismael's "double-mindedness: A model for a dual content cognitive architecture?". Psyche 12 (2).   (Google)
Abstract: Two general worries are raised for the dual content approach to consciousness as presented by Ismael in
 
Van Gulick, Robert (2004). Higher-order global states (hogs): An alternative higher-order model of consciousness. In Rocco J. Gennaro (ed.), Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness: An Anthology. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 10 | Google) 
 
van Gulick, Robert (2000). Inward and upward: Reflection, introspection, and self-awareness. Philosophical Topics 28:275-305.   (Cited by 19 | Google) 
 
Van Gulick, Robert (2006). Mirror, mirror -- is that all? In Uriah Kriegel & Kenneth Williford (eds.), Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Cited by 5 | Google)
Abstract: Consciousness and self-awareness seem intuitively linked, but how they intertwine is less than clear. Must one be self-aware in order to be consciousness? Indeed, is consciousness just a special type of self-awareness? Or perhaps it is the other way round: Is being self-aware a special way of being conscious? Discerning their connections is complicated by the fact that both the main relata themselves admit of many diverse forms and levels. One might be conscious or self- aware in many different ways or respects, and to varying degrees. Thus the real questions of linkage must be posed more specifically. We need to ask not whether the two are bound in general, but whether and how being conscious in some specific sense and degree relates to some particular sort of self-awareness. Only those more specific questions are likely to have fully determinate answers
 
Weisberg, Josh (2008). Same old, same old: The same-order representational theory of consciousness and the division of phenomenal labor. Synthese 160 (2):161-181.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The same-order representation theory of consciousness holds that conscious mental states represent both the world and themselves. This complex representational structure is posited in part to avoid a powerful objection to the more traditional higher-order representation theory of consciousness. The objection contends that the higher-order theory fails to account for the intimate relationship that holds between conscious states and our awareness of them--the theory 'divides the phenomenal labor' in an illicit fashion. This 'failure of intimacy' is exposed by the possibility of misrepresentation by higher-order states. In this paper, I argue that despite appearances, the same-order theory fails to avoid the objection, and thus also has troubles with intimacy





 
Weisberg, Josh (forthcoming). Misrepresenting consciousness. Philosophical Studies.   (Google)
Abstract: An important objection to the “higher-order” theory of consciousness turns on the possibility of higher-order misrepresentation. I argue that the objection fails because it illicitly assumes a characterization of consciousness explicitly rejected by HO theory. This in turn raises the question of what justifies an initial characterization of the data a theory of consciousness must explain. I distinguish between intrinsic and extrinsic characterizations of consciousness, and I propose several desiderata a successful characterization of consciousness must meet. I then defend the particular extrinsic characterization of the HO theory, the “transitivity principle,” against its intrinsic rivals, thereby showing that the misrepresentation objection conclusively falls short
 
Wider, Kathleen (2006). Emotion and self-consciousness. In Uriah Kriegel & Kenneth Williford (eds.), Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
Wider, Kathleen (1993). Sartre and the long distance truck driver: The reflexivity of consciousness. Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology 24 (3):232-249.   (Google) 
 
Williford, Kenneth Wayne, The structure of self-consciousness: A phenomenological and philosophical investigation.   (Google) 
 
Williford, Kenneth (2006). The self-representational structure of consciousness. In Uriah Kriegel & Kenneth Williford (eds.), Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Williford, Kenneth (2006). Zahavi versus Brentano: A rejoinder. Psyche 12 (2).   (Google)
Abstract: Dan Zahavi has argued persuasively that some versions of self- representationalism are implausible on phenomenological and dialectical grounds: they fail to make sense of primitive self-knowledge and lead to an infinite regress. Zahavi proposes an alternative view of ubiquitous prereflective self-consciousness
 
Zahavi, Dan (2004). Back to Brentano? Journal of Consciousness Studies 11 (10-11):66-87.   (Cited by 12 | Google | More links)
Abstract: For a cou ple of decades, higher-order the o ries of con scious ness have enjoyed great pop u lar ity, but they have recently been met with grow ing dis sat is - fac tion. Many have started to look else where for via ble alter na tives, and within the last few years, quite a few have redis cov ered Brentano. In this paper such a (neo-)Brentanian one-level account of con scious ness will be out lined and dis - cussed. It will be argued that it can con trib ute impor tant insights to our under - stand ing of the rela tion between con scious ness and self-aware ness, but it will also be argued that the account remains beset with some prob lems, and that it will ulti mately make more sense to take a closer look at Sartre, Husserl, and Heidegger, if one is on the look out for prom is ing alter na tives to the higher-order the o ries, than to return all the way to Brentano





 
Zahavi, Dan (2006). Thinking about consciousness: Phenomenological perspectives. In Uriah Kriegel & Kenneth Williford (eds.), Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Zahavi, Dan (2006). Two takes on a one-level account of consciousness. Psyche 12 (2).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: My presentation will discuss two one-level accounts of consciousness, a Brentanian and a Husserlian. I will address some of the relevant differences







 
1.4b Dennett's Functionalism 

96 / 97 entries displayed





Akins, Kathleen (1996). Lost the plot? Reconstructing Dennett's multiple drafts theory of consciousness. Mind and Language 11 (1):1-43.   (Cited by 9 | Google | More links) 




 
Akins, Kathleen (1996). Ships in the night: Churchland and Ramachandran on Dennett's theory of consciousness. In Kathleen Akins (ed.), Perception. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Antony, Michael V. (2002). Toward an ontological interpretation of Dennett's theory of consciousness. Philosophia 29 (1-4):343-370.   (Google | More links) 




 
Arbib, Michael A. (1972). Consciousness: The secondary role of language. Journal of Philosophy 64 (5):579-591.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 





 
Barresi, John & Christie, John R. (2002). Using illusory line motion to differentiate misrepresentation (stalinesque) and misremembering (orwellian) accounts of consciousness. Consciousness and Cognition 11 (2):347-365.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: It has been suggested that the difference between misremembering (Orwellian) and misrepresentation (Stalinesque) models of consciousness cannot be differentiated (Dennett, 1991). According to an Orwellian account a briefly presented stimulus is seen and then forgotten; whereas, by a Stalinesque account it is never seen. At the same time, Dennett suggested a method for assessing whether an individual is conscious of something. An experiment was conducted which used the suggested method for assessing consciousness to look at Stalinesque and Orwellian distinctions. A visual illusion, illusory line motion, was presented and participants were requested to make judgments that reflected what they were aware of. The participants were able to make responses indicating that they were aware of the actual stimulus in some conditions, but only of the illusion in others. This finding supports a claim that the difference between the Orwellian and Stalinesque accounts may be empirically observable, and that both types of events may occur depending on task and stimulus parameters





 
Bloomfield, Paul (1998). Dennett's misrememberings. Philosophia 26 (1-2):207-218.   (Google | More links) 




 
Block, Ned (1995). What is Dennett's theory a theory of? Philosophical Topics 22:23-40.   (Cited by 9 | Google)
Abstract: A convenient locus of discussion is provided by Dennett
 
Bricke, John (1985). Consciousness and Dennett's intentionalist net. Philosophical Studies 48 (September):249-56.   (Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Bricke, John (1984). Dennett's eliminative arguments. Philosophical Studies 45 (May):413-29.   (Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Bringsjord, Selmer (online). Explaining phi without Dennett's exotica: Good ol' computation suffices.   (Google | More links) 





 
Brook, Andrew (2000). Judgments and drafts eight years later. In Andrew Brook, Don Ross & David L. Thompson (eds.), Dennett's Philosophy: A Comprehensive Assessment. MIT Press.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Now that some years have passed, how does this picture of consciousness look? On the one hand, Dennett's work has vastly expanded the range of options for thinking about conscious experiences and conscious subjects. On the other hand, I suspect that the implications of his picture have been oversold (perhaps more by others than by Dennett himself). The rhetoric of _CE_ is radical in places but I do not sure that the actual implications for commonsense views of Seemings and Subjects are nearly as radical





 
Brook, Andrew (online). The appearance of things.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: These two contributions have had different fates. The attack on _qualia_ and related fantasies has been enormously influential, in part because it follows in a long line of scepticism about the traditional ways of thinking about this topic, a tradition including, among philosophers, the later Wittgenstein, Dennett's teacher Gilbert Ryle, John Austin and Wilfrid Sellars. Psychologists such as Tony Marcel and Bernard Baars and medical neuroscientists such as Marcel Kinsbourne are examples of leading researchers whose work is done in the light of Dennett's critique. Indeed, one can hardly pick up any leading journal of consciousness studies such as the _Journal of Consciousness Studies_ or _Consciousness and_ _Cognition_ without finding Dennett's name mentioned somewhere. The influence has not been easily won and the ground is still contested. Ringing rejections of Dennett's arguments still appear and he answers them in papers with ferocious titles such as 'The Unimagined Preposterousness of Zombies' (1995a). Thought experiments still appear purporting to show that _qualia_ are remarkable, in fact utterly extraordinary phenomena. Such rear-guard actions notwithstanding,. many consciousness researchers are now convinced that deep incoherencies lie buried in the traditional notion of conscious states






 
Carman, Taylor (2007). Dennett on seeming. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 6 (1-2).   (Google | More links) 





 
Carr, David (1998). Phenomenology and fiction in Dennett. International Journal of Philosophical Studies 6 (3):331-344.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In Consciousness Explained and other works, Daniel Dennett uses the concept of phenomenology (along with his variant, called heterophenomenology) in almost complete disregard of the work of Husserl and his successors in German and French philosophy. Yet it can be argued that many of the most important ideas of Husserl, Merleau-Ponty and others (and not just the idea of intentionality) reappear in Dennett's work in only slightly altered form. In this article I try to show this in two ways, first by talking in a general way about Dennett's phenomenology, and second by examining his treatment of the concept of the self. In both cases I argue that Dennett should have read his Husserl and Merleau-Ponty more carefully, since in the end his (hetero-) phenomenology is methodologically incoherent and suffers from something like a weakness of will. This emerges especially in his use of the notion of fiction







 
Churchland, Paul M. (2002). Catching Consciousness in a Recurrent Net. In Andrew Brook & Don Ross (eds.), Daniel Dennett: Contemporary Philosophy in Focus. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Churchland, Paul M. (1999). Densmore and Dennett on virtual machines and consciousness. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 59 (3):763-767.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Churchland, Patricia S. & Ramachandran, Vilayanur S. (1993). Filling in: Why Dennett is wrong. In B. Dahlbom (ed.), Dennett and His Critics. Blackwell.   (Cited by 93 | Annotation | Google)




  
Clark, Stephen R. L. (1993). Minds, memes, and rhetoric. Inquiry 36 (1-2):3-16.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Crooks, Mark (2003). Phenomenology in absentia: Dennett's philosophy of mind. Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Crooks, Mark (2004). The last philosophical behaviorist: Content and consciousness explained away. Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology 24 (1):50-121.   (Google) 
 
Dahlbom, B. (ed.) (1995). Dennett and His Critics. Cambridge: Blackwell.   (Cited by 33 | Google) 
 
Dennett, Daniel C. (2001). Are we explaining consciousness yet? Cognition 79 (1):221-37.   (Cited by 72 | Google | More links) 







 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1968). Content and Consciousness. Routledge.   (Cited by 351 | Google | More links) 










 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1991). Consciousness Explained. Penguin.   (Cited by 3274 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: Little, Brown, 1992 Review by Glenn Branch on Jul 5th 1999 Volume: 3, Number: 27







 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1993). Caveat emptor. Consciousness and Cognition 2 (12-13):48-57.   (Cited by 11 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: What I find particularly valuable in the juxtaposition of these three essays on my book is the triangulation made possible by their different versions of much the same story. I present my view as a product of cognitive science, but all three express worries that it may involve some sort of ominous backsliding towards the evils of behaviorism. I agree with Baars and McGovern when they suggest that philosophy has had some baleful influences on psychology during this century. Logical positivism at its best was full of subtle softenings, but behaviorist psychologists bought the tabloid version, and sold it to their students in large quantities. George Miller's account of those dreary days is not an exaggeration, and the effects still linger in some quarters. (Philosophers are often amused--but they should really be disconcerted--to note that the only living, preaching logical positivists today are to be found in psychology departments.)





 
Dennett, Daniel C. & Kinsbourne, Marcel (1992). Escape from the cartesian theater. Reply to commentaries on Time and the Observer: The Where and When of Consciousness in the Brain. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 15:183-247.   (Google)
Abstract: Damasio remarks, it "informs virtually all research on mind and brain, explicitly or implicitly." Indeed, serial information processing models generally run this risk (Kinsbourne, 1985). The commentaries provide a wealth of confirming instances of the seductive power of this idea. Our sternest critics Block, Farah, Libet, and Treisman) adopt fairly standard Cartesian positions; more interesting are those commentators who take themselves to be mainly in agreement with us, but who express reservations or offer support with arguments that betray a continuing allegiance to one or another tenet of the view we sought to discredit
 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1995). Get real. Philosophical Topics 22.   (Cited by 15 | Google | More links)
Abstract: There could be no more gratifying response to a philosopher's work than such a bounty of challenging, high-quality essays. I have learned a great deal from them, and hope that other readers will be as delighted as I have been by the insights gathered here. One thing I have learned is just how much hard work I had left for others to do, by underestimating the degree of explicit formulation of theses and arguments that is actually required to bring these issues into optimal focus. These essays cover my work from top to bottom. Just about every nook and cranny is probed and tested in ways I could never do for myself. The essays thus highlight the areas of weakest exposition of my views; they also show the weak points of the views themselves--and suggest repairs, which I am sometimes happy to accept, but not always, since there are a few cases in which one critic deftly disarms another, sight unseen. I will be fascinated to learn how the individual authors react to each other's essays, since they side with me on different points, and disagree about what is still in need of revision or repair










 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1995). Is Perception the "Leading Edge" of Memory? In A. Spafadora (ed.), Iride: Luoghi Della Memoria E Dell'oblio.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: Daniel C. Dennett 
Is Perception the 'Leading Edge' of Memory? 
Consciousness appears to us to consist of a sequence of contentful items, arranged in a sequence, the so-called "stream of consciousness," in which each item in turn bursts quite suddenly into consciousness and thereby enters memory, perhaps only briefly to be remembered, and then forgotten. I think that hidden in this comfortable and largely innocent picture of consciousness is a deep and seductive mistake. I intend to expose and elucidate that mistake, and describe an alternative vision




 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1993). Living on the edge. Inquiry 36 (1-2):135-59.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: In a survey of issues in philosophy of mind some years ago, I observed that "it is widely granted these days that dualism is not a serious view to contend with, but rather a cliff over which to push one's opponents." (Dennett, 1978, p.252) That was true enough, and I for one certainly didn't deplore the fact, but this rich array of essays tackling my book amply demonstrates that a cliff examined with care is better than a cliff ignored. And, as I have noted in my discussion of the blind spot and other gaps, you really can't perceive an edge unless you represent both sides of it. So one of the virtues of this gathering of essays is that it permits both friend and foe alike to take a good hard look at dualism, as represented by those who are tempted by it, those who can imagine no alternative to it, and those who, like me, still find it to be--in a word--hopeless











 
Dennett, Daniel C. & Kinsbourne, Marcel (1995). Multiple drafts: An eternal golden braid? Reply to Glicksohn and Salter. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 18 (4):810-11.   (Google)
Abstract: We have learned that the issues we raised are very difficult to think about clearly, and what "works" for one thinker falls flat for another, and leads yet another astray. So it is particularly useful to get these re-expressions of points we have tried to make. Both commentaries help by proposing further details for the Multiple Drafts Model, and asking good questions. They either directly clarify, or force us to clarify, our own account. They also both demonstrate how hard it is for even sympathetic commentators always to avoid the very habits of thought the Multiple Drafts Model was designed to combat. While acknowledging and expanding on their positive contributions, we must sound a few relatively minor alarms
 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1979). On the absence of phenomenology. In Donald F. Gustafson & Bangs L. Tapscott (eds.), Body, Mind, and Method. Kluwer.   (Cited by 11 | Annotation | Google)




  
Dennett, Daniel C. (1993). Precis of Consciousness Explained. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 53 (4):889-931.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1978). Reply to Arbib and Gunderson. In Brainstorms. MIT Press.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google)




  
Dennett, Daniel C. (1994). Self-portrait. In Samuel D. Guttenplan (ed.), Companion to the Philosophy of Mind. Blackwell.   (Cited by 5 | Google)
Abstract: In my opinion, the two main topics in the philosophy of mind are content and consciousness. As the title of my first book, _Content and Consciousness_ (1969) suggested, that is the order in which they must be addressed: first, a theory of content or intentionality--a phenomenon more fundamental than consciousness--and then, building on that foundation, a theory of consciousness. Over the years I have found myself recapitulating this basic structure twice, partly in order to respond to various philosophical objections, but more importantly, because my research on foundational issues in cognitive science led me into different aspects of the problems. The articles in the first half of
 
Dennett, Daniel C. (2005). Sweet Dreams: Philosophical Obstacles to a Science of Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Cited by 22 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In the final essay, the "intrinsic" nature of "qualia" is compared with the naively imagined "intrinsic value" of a dollar in ...









 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1996). Seeing is believing--or is it? In Kathleen Akins (ed.), [Book Chapter]. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links)
Abstract: We would all like to have a good theory of perception. Such a theory would account for all the known phenomena and predict novel phenomena, explaining everything in terms of processes occurring in nervous systems in accordance with the principles and laws already established by science: the principles of optics, physics, biochemistry, and the like. Such a theory might come to exist without our ever having to answer the awkward "philosophical" question that arises










 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1978). Toward a cognitive theory of consciousness. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science 9.   (Cited by 43 | Annotation | Google)




  
Dennett, Daniel C. & Kinsbourne, Marcel (1992). Time and the observer: The where and when of consciousness in the brain. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 15:183-201.   (Cited by 394 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: _Behavioral and Brain Sciences_ , 15, 183-247, 1992. Reprinted in _The Philosopher's Annual_ , Grim, Mar and Williams, eds., vol. XV-1992, 1994, pp. 23-68; Noel Sheehy and Tony Chapman, eds., _Cognitive Science_ , Vol. I, Elgar, 1995, pp.210-274







































 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1988). The Evolution of Consciousness. In J. Brockman (ed.), The Reality Club, Vol. III. Prentice-Hall.   (Cited by 7 | Annotation | Google)




  
Dennett, Daniel C. (1994). Tiptoeing Past the Covered Wagons. In U. Neisser & David A. Jopling (eds.), The Conceptual Self in Context: Culture, Experience, Self-Understanding. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: David Carr complains, in "Dennett Explained, or The Wheel Reinvents Dennett," (Report #26), that I have ignored deconstructionism and Phenomenology. This charge is in some regards correct and in others not. Briefly, here is how my own encounters with these fields have looked to me








 
Densmore, Shannon & Dennett, Daniel C. (1999). The virtues of virtual machines. Philosophy and Phenemenological Research 59 (3):747-61.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Paul Churchland's book (hereafter ER)is an entertaining and instructive advertisement for a "neurocomputational" vision of how the brain (and mind) works. While we agree with its general thrust, and commend its lucid pedagogy on a host of difficult topics, we note that such pedagogy often exploits artificially heightened contrast, and sometimes the result is a misleading caricature instead of a helpful simplification. In particular, Churchland is eager to contrast the explanation of consciousness that can be accomplished by his "aspiring new structural and dynamic cognitive prototype: recurrent PDP networks" (p.266) with what strikes him as the retrograde introduction by Dennett of a virtual von Neumannesque machine--a "failed prototype"--as the key element in an explanation of human consciousness (in 
_Consciousness_ 
_Explained_, 1991, hereafter, CE). We will try to show that by oversimplifying Dennett's alternative, he has taken a potential supplement to his own view--a much needed supplement--and transformed it in his imagination into a subversive threat. In part 1, we will expose and correct the mistaken contrasts. In part 2, we will compare the performance of the two views on Churchland's list of seven features of consciousness any theory must account for, showing that Dennett's account provides more than Churchland has recognized, and indeed offers answers to key questions that Churchland's account is powerless to address. At that point, Churchland's project and Dennett's could be seen to collaborate in a useful division of labor instead of being in mortal combat, were it not for what appears to be a fairly major disagreement about consciousness in non-human animals. Part 3 briefly examines this issue. It may be due to a misunderstanding, which when cleared up might restore the happy prospect of unification






 
Derksen, Anthony A. (2005). Dennett's rhetorical strategies in Consciousness Explained. Journal for General Philosophy of Science 36 (1):29-48.   (Google | More links) 





 
Dretske, Fred (1995). Differences that make no difference. Philosophical Topics 22:41-57.   (Cited by 10 | Annotation | Google)




  
Fellows, Roger & O'Hear, Anthony (1993). Consciousness avoided. Inquiry 36 (1 & 2):73 – 91.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Foster, John A. (1993). Dennett's rejection of dualism. Inquiry 36 (1-2):17-31.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Freeman, Anthony (2006). A Daniel come to judgement? Dennett and the revisioning of transpersonal theory. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (3):95-109.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: Transpersonal psychology first emerged as an academic discipline in the 1960s and has subsequently broadened into a range of transpersonal studies. Jorge Ferrer (2002) has called for a 'revisioning' of transpersonal theory, dethroning inner experience from its dominant role in defining and validating spiritual reality. In the current paradigm he detects a lingering Cartesianism, which subtly entrenches the very subject-object divide that transpersonalists seek to overcome. This paper outlines the development and current shape of the transpersonal movement, compares Ferrer's epistemology with the heterophenomenology of Daniel Dennett, and speculates on the integration of the latter into transpersonal theory
 
Gunderson, Keith (1972). Content and Consciousness. And the Mind-Body Problem.   (Google) 
 
Gunderson, Keith (1972). Content and consciousness and the mind-body problem. Journal of Philosophy 64 (5):591-604.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 





 
Holt, D. Lynn (1999). Metaphor, history, consciousness: From Locke to Dennett. Philosophical Forum 30 (3):187-200.   (Google | More links) 






 
Hutto, Daniel D. (1995). Consciousness demystified: A Wittgensteinian critique of Dennett. The Monist 78 (4):464-79.   (Cited by 12 | Google) 
 
Jackson, Frank (1993). Appendix a (for philosophers). Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 53 (4):897-901.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Jarrett, Greg (1999). Conspiracy theories of consciousness. Philosophical Studies 96 (1):45-58.   (Google | More links) 




 
Johnsen, Bredo C. (1997). Dennett on qualia and consciousness: A critique. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 27 (1):47-82.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Kirk, Robert E. (1993). "The best set of tools"? Dennett's metaphors and the mind-body problem. Philosophical Quarterly 44 (172):335-43.   (Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Lloyd, Dan (2000). Popping the thought balloon. In Don Ross, Andrew Brook & David L. Thompson (eds.), Dennett's Philosophy: A Comprehensive Assessment. MIT Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Many recovering dualists find that the old Cartesian demons are hard to exorcise. Dual substance abuse manifests itself not only as metaphysical dualism, but as a pervasive epistemological framework that creates an unhealthy codependent relationship between scientific realism and phenomenology. Daniel Dennett has led philosophers to recognize many of the symptoms of creeping crypto Cartesianism. In this paper, I try to take Dennett to the limit: Descartes lives on, I argue, in the very heart of cognitive science, in the concept of representation. I outline a five-step program for overcoming this lingering, fundamental, allegiance to Cartesianism, and discuss Dennett's own progress along this path





 
Lockwood, Michael (1993). Dennett's mind. Inquiry 36 (1-2):59-72.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google)




  
MacDorman, Karl F. (2004). Extending the medium hypothesis: The Dennett-Mangan controversy and beyond. Journal of Mind and Behavior 25 (3):237-257.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Mangan, Bruce (1993). Dennett, consciousness, and the sorrows of functionalism. Consciousness and Cognition 2:1-17.   (Cited by 23 | Google) 
 
Marbach, Eduard (1988). How to study consciousness phenomenologically or quite a lot comes to mind. Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology 19 (October):252-268.   (Cited by 10 | Google) 
 
McCauley, Robert N. (1993). Why the blind can't lead the blind: Dennett on the blind spot, blindsight, and sensory qualia. Consciousness and Cognition 2:155-64.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google)




  
McGinn, Colin (1995). Consciousness evaded: Comments on Dennett. Philosophical Perspectives 9:241-49.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 





 
Nicolson, Stewart (1995). Illusions of consciousness. Dialogue 34 (4):769-775.   (Google) 
 
Nikolinakos, Drakon (2000). Dennett on qualia: The case of pain, smell and taste. Philosophical Psychology 13 (4):505 – 522.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Dennett has maintained that a careful examination of our intuitive notion of qualia reveals that it is a confused notion, that it is advisable to accept that experience does not have the properties designated by it and that it is best to eliminate it. Because most scientists share this notion of qualia, the major line of attack of his project becomes that of raising objections against the ability of science to answer some basic questions about qualia. I try to show that science appeals to qualia and that it in fact adheres to a notion of qualia different from the one that Dennett has attributed to it. It is argued that qualia are amenable to scientific investigation and that this is the reason why science contributes toward the clarification of the notion of qualia. I also try to show that Dennett's skepticism about the abilities of science in answering questions posited by one of his thought experiments is unwarranted. I conclude that we need not accept Dennett's eliminativism about qualia







 
Nixon, Greg (1999). A hermeneutic objection: Language and the inner view. Journal of Consciousness Studies 6 (2-3):257-269.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
O'Brien, Gerard & Opie, Jonathan (1999). A defense of cartesian materialism. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 59 (4):939-63.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: One of the principal tasks Dennett sets himself in _Consciousness Explained _is to demolish the Cartesian theatre model of phenomenal consciousness, which in its contemporary garb takes the form of _Cartesian materialism_: the idea that conscious experience is a _process of presentation_ realized in the physical materials of the brain. The now standard response to Dennett is that, in focusing on Cartesian materialism, he attacks an impossibly naive account of consciousness held by no one currently working in cognitive science or the philosophy of mind. Our response is quite different. We believe that, once properly formulated, Cartesian materialism is no straw man. Rather, it is an attractive hypothesis about the relationship between the computational architecture of the brain and phenomenal consciousness, and hence one that is worthy of further exploration. Consequently, our primary aim in this paper is to defend Cartesian materialism from Dennett











 
Puccetti, Roland (1993). Dennett on the split-brain. Psycoloquy 4 (52).   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In "Consciousness Explained," Dennett (1991) denies that split-brain humans have double consciousness: he describes the experiments as "anecdotal." In attempting to replace the Cartesian Theatre of the Mind" with his own "Multiple Drafts" view of consciousness, Dennett rejects the notion of the mind as a countable thing in favour of its being a mere "abstraction." His criticisms of the standard interpretation of the split-brain data are analyzed here and each is found to be open to objections. There exist people who have survived left ["dominant"] cerebral hemispherectomy; by Dennett's criteria, they would not have minds







 
Rakover, Sam S. (1994). Consciousness explained?: A commentary on Dennett's Consciousness Explained. International Studies in Philosophy 26 (2):97-99.   (Google) 
 
Rey, Georges (1995). Dennett's unrealistic psychology. Philosophical Topics 22:259-89.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Robinson, William S. (1972). Dennett's analysis of awareness. Philosophical Studies 23 (April):147-52.   (Google | More links) 




 
Robinson, William S. (1994). Orwell, stalin, and determinate qualia. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 75 (2):151-64.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google)




  
Rockwell, Teed (1996). Awareness, mental phenomena, and consciousness: A synthesis of Dennett and Rosenthal. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (5-6):463-76.   (Google) 
 
Rorty, Richard (1982). Comments on Dennett's how to study human consciousness empirically. Synthese 53 (November):181-187.   (Google) 
 
Rorty, Richard (1972). Dennett on awareness. Philosophical Studies 23 (April):153-62.   (Google | More links) 




 
Rosenthal, D. (2000). Content, interpretation, and consciousness. Protosociology 14:67-84.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Ross, Don (1994). Dennett's conceptual reform. Behavior and Philosophy 22 (1):41-52.   (Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (1994). First-person operationalism and mental taxonomy. Philosophical Topics 22:319-349.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (1993). Multiple drafts and higher-order thoughts. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 53 (4):911-18.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 




 
Rosenthal, David M. (1995). Multiple drafts and the facts of the matter. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Ferdinand Schoningh.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google)




  
Baker, Lynne Rudder (1995). Content meets consciousness. Philosophical Topics 22:1-22.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Ruz, M.; Tudela, P. & Acero, Juan J. (2002). Consciousness explained by Dennett: A critical review from a cognitive neuroscience point of view. Theoria 17:81-112.   (Google) 
 
Schneider, Susan (2007). Daniel Dennett on the nature of consciousness. In Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Google)
Abstract: One of the most influential philosophical voices in the consciousness studies community is that of Daniel Dennett. Outside of consciousness studies, Dennett is well-known for his work on numerous topics, such as intentionality, artificial intelligence, free will, evolutionary theory, and the basis of religious experience. (Dennett, 1984, 1987, 1995c, 2005) In 1991, just as researchers and philosophers were beginning to turn more attention to the nature of consciousness, Dennett authored his Consciousness Explained. Consciousness Explained aimed to develop both a theory of consciousness and a powerful critique of the then mainstream view of the nature of consciousness, which Dennett called,
 
Seager, William E. (1999). Dennett, part I and II. In Theories of Consciousness: An Introduction and Assessment. Routledge.   (Google) 
 
Seager, William E. (1993). Verification, skepticism, and consciousness. Inquiry 36 (1-2):113-133.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Shoemaker, Sydney (1993). Lovely and suspect ideas. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 53 (4):903-908.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 




 
Siewert, Charles (1993). What Dennett can't imagine and why. Inquiry 36 (1-2):93-112.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google)




  
Sprigge, Timothy L. S. (1993). Is Dennett a disillusioned zimbo? Inquiry 36 (1-2):33-57.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Thompson, David L. (2003). Are there really appearances? Dennett and Husserl on seemings and presence. In Richard Feist & William Sweet (eds.), Husserl and Stein. The Council for Research in Values and Philosophy.   (Google) 
 
Todd, S. J. (2006). Unmasking multiple drafts. Philosophical Psychology 19 (4):477-494.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Any theoretician constructing a serious model of consciousness should carefully assess the details of empirical data generated in the neurosciences and psychology. A failure to account for those details may cast doubt on the adequacy of that model. This paper presents a case in point. Dennett and Kinsbourne's (Dennett, D., & Kinsbourne, M. (1992). Time and the observer: The where and when of consciousness in the brain. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 15, 183-243) assault on the materialist version of the Cartesian Theater model of the mind relies significantly on the superiority of their Multiple Drafts model of consciousness as an explanation of the phenomenon of metacontrast. However, their description of metacontrast is, in important ways, inadequate. The result is that their explanation of how the Multiple Drafts model handles this phenomenon fails to account for the actual data. In this paper I offer a more complete description of metacontrast, show how Dennett and Kinsbourne's explanation fails, and argue that there are good theoretical reasons for choosing the so-called Stalinesque model over the so-called Orwellian model








 
Toribio, Josefa (1993). Why there still has to be a theory of consciousness. Consciousness and Cognition 2:28-47.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google)




  
Tye, Michael (1993). Reflections on Dennett and consciousness. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 53 (4):891-6.   (Cited by 5 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Vaden, Tere (2001). Qualifying qualia through the skyhook test. Inquiry 44 (2):149-170.   (Google) 
 
van Gulick, Robert (1995). Dennett, drafts, and phenomenal realism. Philosophical Topics 22:443-55.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Volkov, Dmirty B. (online). The moving target: Multiple drafts or fame in brain?   (Google) 
 
Voorhees, Burton (2000). Dennett and the deep blue sea. Journal of Consciousness Studies 7 (3):53-69.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Wright, Edmond L. (2006). Dennett as illusionist. Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology.   (Google) 
 
Wuketits, Franz M. (1994). Consciousness explained -- or explained away? Acta Analytica 9 (12):55-64.   (Google) 
 
1.4c Searle's Biological Naturalism




Armstrong, David M. (1991). Searle's neo-cartesian theory of consciousness. Philosophical Issues 1:67-71.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 





 
Beards, Andrew (1994). John Searle and human consciousness. Heythrop Journal 35 (3):281-295.   (Google | More links) 




 
Burton, Robert G. (1995). Searle on rediscovering the mind. Man and World 28 (2):163-174.   (Google) 
 
Code, Alan D. (1991). Aristotle, Searle, and the mind-body problem. In Ernest Lepore & Robert Van Gulick (eds.), John Searle and His Critics. Cambridge: Blackwell.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Collins, Corbin (1997). Searle on consciousness and dualism. International Journal of Philosophical Studies 5 (1):15-33.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In this article, I examine and criticize John Searle's account of the relation between mind and body. Searle rejects dualism and argues that the traditional mind-body problem has a 'simple solution': mental phenomena are both caused by biological processes in the brain and are themselves features of the brain. More precisely, mental states and events are macro-properties of neurons in much the same way that solidity and liquidity are macro-properties of molecules. However, Searle also maintains that the mental is 'ontologically irreducible' to the physical, a view which follows from his understanding of the status and nature of consciousness. Consciousness is essential to the mind; subjectivity is essential to consciousness; and no purely objective, physical description of consciousness could ever capture or explain its essentially subjective character. None the less, Searle maintains that irreducibility is a 'trivial' result of our 'definitional practices' and is entirely compatible with his theory. I contend that this latter claim is based on an equivocation: Searle's conclusion only seems to follow because he alters and trivializes what philosophers ordinarily mean by 'reduction'. I also maintain that Searle's position is reductionist in the ordinary, nontrivial sense. For this reason, his theory fails to accommodate the subjective character of consciousness and fails to solve the traditional mind-body problem. Finally, I briefly discuss Searle's claim that he is not an epiphenomenalist, and argue that given the assumptions of his view there is no interesting causal role for consciousness in the physical world





 
Corcoran, Kevin J. (2001). The trouble with Searle's biological naturalism. Erkenntnis 55 (3):307-324.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1993). Review of Searle, the rediscovery of the mind. [Journal (Paginated)] 90 (4):93-205.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Everyone agrees that consciousness is a very special phenomenon, unique in several ways, but there is scant agreement on just how special it is, and whether or not an explanation of it can be accommodated within normal science. John Searle's view, defended with passion in this book, is highly idiosyncratic: what is special about consciousness is its "subjective ontology," but normal science can accommodate subjective ontology alongside (not within) its otherwise objective ontology. Once we clear away some widespread confusions about what science requires, and dismiss the misbegotten field of cognitive science that has been engendered by those confusions, the subjective ontology of the mind, he claims, will lose its aura of unacceptable mystery








 
Garrett, Brian J. (1995). Non-reductionism and John Searle's The Rediscovery of the Mind. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 55 (1):209-215.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 




 
Hershfield, Jeffrey (1997). Searle's regimen for rediscovering the mind. Dialogue 36 (2):361-374.   (Google) 
 
Hodgson, David (1994). Why Searle has not rediscovered the mind. Journal of Consciousness Studies 1 (2):264-274.   (Google) 
 
Honderich, Ted (1995). Consciousness, neural functionalism, real subjectivity. American Philosophical Quarterly 32 (4):369-381.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google)




  
Honderich, Ted (2001). Mind the guff. Journal Of Consciousness Studies 8 (4):62-78.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: (I) John Searle's conception of consciousness in the 'Mind the Gap' issue of the Journal of Consciousness Studies remains short on content, no advance on either materialism or traditional dualism. Still, it is sufficiently contentful to be self-contradictory. And so his Biological Subjectivity on Two Levels, like materialism and dualism, needs replacing by a radically different conception of consciousness -- such as Consciousness as Existence. (II) From his idea that we can discover 'gaps', seeming absences of causal circumstances, in our experience of deciding and acting, Searle is led to the positing of a self and to mysterious causing. (III) In fact philosophers of determinism and freedom over three centuries have concerned themselves with what are now termed 'gaps'. Searle's advance is a useful terminological one. Compatibilist philosophers of freedom, contrary to what is said, have not missed any point at all. A successor to both Compatibilism and Incompatibilism is needed. (IV) Searle's previous account of deciding and acting in Biological Subjectivity on Two Levels does indeed fail because of its epiphenomenalism. (V) The culmination of his paper, his preferred hypothesis now about deciding and acting, is that down-up causation is true of it but not left-right causation. Quantum Theory as often interpreted doesn't work down-up but does work left-right. The hypothesis is entirely in the tradition of the Incompatibilist and Libertarian philosophers of determinism and freedom, whom Searle has joined, but is factually incredible





 
Jacquette, Dale (2002). Searle's antireductionism. Facta Philosophica 4:143-66.   (Google) 
 
Kenyon, Timothy A. (1998). Searle rediscovers what was not lost. Dialogue 37 (1):117-130.   (Google) 
 
Kim, Jaegwon (1995). Mental causation in Searle's biological naturalism. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 55 (1):189-194.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links) 





 
Moreland, James P. (1998). Searle's biological naturalism and the argument from consciousness. Faith and Philosophy 15 (1):68-91.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1991). Ontological subjectivity. Journal of Mind and Behavior 175:175-200.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Northoff, Georg & Musholt, K. (2006). How can Searle avoid property dualism? Epistemic-ontological inference and autoepistemic limitation. Philosophical Psychology 19 (5):589-605.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Searle suggests biological naturalism as a solution to the mind-brain problem that escapes traditional terminology with its seductive pull towards either dualism or materialism. We reconstruct Searle's argument and demonstrate that it needs additional support to represent a position truly located between dualism and materialism. The aim of our paper is to provide such an additional argument. We introduce the concept of "autoepistemic limitation" that describes our principal inability to directly experience our own brain as a brain from the first-person perspective. The neglect of the autoepistemic limitation leads to inferences from epistemic properties to ontological features - we call this "epistemic-ontological inference." Searle attempts to avoid such epistemic-ontological inference but does not provide a sufficient argument. Once the autoepistemic limitation is considered, epistemic-ontological inference can be avoided. As a consequence, one can escape traditional terminology with its seductive pull towards either dualism or materialism







 
Novotny, Daniel D. (2007). Searle on the unity of the world. Axiomathes 17 (1).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: According to mentalism some existing things are endowed with (subjectively) conscious minds. According to physicalism all existing things consist entirely of physical particles in fields of force. Searle holds that mentalism and physicalism are compatible and true





 
Ofsti, Audun (1994). Searle, Leibniz and 'the first person': A note on the epilogue of intentionality. In Analyomen 1. Hawthorne: De Gruyter.   (Google) 
 
Olafson, Frederick A. (1994). Brain dualism. Inquiry 37 (2):253-265.   (Google) 
 
Page, Sam (2004). Searle's realism deconstructed. Philosophical Forum 35 (3):249-274.   (Google | More links) 





 
Palmer, Daniel E. (1998). Searle on consciousness: Or how not to be a physicalist. Ratio 11 (2):159-169.   (Google | More links) 






 
Reber, Arthur S. (1997). Caterpillars and consciousness. Philosophical Psychology 10 (4):437-49.   (Cited by 5 | Google)
Abstract: The dominant position in the field of artificial intelligence (AI) is computationalism where the operative principle is that cognition in general and consciousness in particular can be captured by identification of the proper set of computations. This position has been attacked from several angles, most effectively, in my opinion, by John Searle in his now famous Chinese Room thought experiment. I critique this Searlean perspective on the grounds that, while it is probably correct in its essentials, it does not go far enough. Quite simply, it runs afoul of the problem of emergentism. The proffered solution to this problem is that consciousness (or very rudimentary forms of it) needs to be viewed as an inherent property of organic form. While this recasting of the problem solves the emergentist dilemma it opens up a number of other issues. However, the new problems, unlike the old, appear in principle to be amenable to scientific analysis
 
Sabat,  (1999). Consciousness, emergence and naturalism. Teorema 18 (1):139-153.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 




 
Searle, John R. (2007). Biological naturalism. In Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Searle, John R. (2002). Consciousness and Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 43 | Google | More links)
Abstract: One of the most important and influential philosophers of the last 30 years, John Searle has been concerned throughout his career with a single overarching question: how can we have a unified and theoretically satisfactory account of ourselves and of our relations to other people and to the natural world? In other words, how can we reconcile our common-sense conception of ourselves as conscious, free, mindful, rational agents in a world that we believe comprises brute, unconscious, mindless, meaningless, mute physical particles in fields of force? The essays in this collection are all related to the broad overarching issue that unites the diverse strands of Searle's work. Gathering in an accessible manner essays available only in relatively obscure books and journals, this collection will be of particular value to professionals and upper-level students in philosophy as well as to Searle's more extended audience in such fields as psychology and linguistics















 
Searle, John R. (2000). Mental causation, conscious and unconscious: A reply to Anthonie Meijers. International Journal of Philosophical Studies 8 (2):171-177.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 






 
Searle, John R. (1992). The Rediscovery of the Mind. MIT Press.   (Cited by 1413 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: The title of The Rediscovery of the Mind suggests the question "When was the mind lost?" Since most people may not be aware that it ever was lost, we must also then ask "Who lost it?" It was lost, of course, only by philosophers, by certain philosophers. This passed unnoticed by society at large. The "rediscovery" is also likely to pass unnoticed. But has the mind been rediscovered by the same philosophers who "lost" it? Probably not. John Searle is an analytic philosopher, with some of the same notions as the positivists and behaviorists who rejected consciousness and "lost" the mind in the first place, but he also does not sound like the kind of reductionist who would have joined that crowd. His views, indeed, are sensible enough, and some of his insights so important, that it is a shame to find his thought profoundly limited by some of the same mistakes and prejudices that ruined philosophy, and not just philosophy of mind, under the influence of those positivists and behaviorists. There is enough of genuine value in his treatment, that it can easily be taken up and, with relatively slight modification, added to what is of permanent value in the history of philosophy







 
Searle, John R. (2002). Why I am not a property dualist. Journal of Consciousness Studies 9 (12):57-64.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links)
Abstract: I have argued in a number of writings[1] that the philosophical part (though not the neurobiological part) of the traditional mind-body problem has a fairly simple and obvious solution: All of our mental phenomena are caused by lower level neuronal processes in the brain and are themselves realized in the brain as higher level, or system, features. The form of causation is









 
Sinari, Ramakant (2001). Reflections on John Searle's philosophy of consciousness. Journal of Indian Council of Philosophical Research 18 (3):91-106.   (Google) 
 
Stoutland, Frederick M. (1994). Searle's consciousness: A review of John Searle's The Rediscovery of the Mind. Philosophical Books 35 (4):245-254.   (Google) 
 
Taliaferro, Charles (2005). The give and take of biological naturalism: John Searle and the case for dualism. Philosophia Christi 7 (2):447-462.   (Google) 
 
Warfield, Ted A. (1999). Searle's causal powers. Analysis 59 (1):29-32.   (Google | More links) 





 
Weitze, Marc-Denis (1997). Searle, Edelman und die evolution Des bewusstseins: Mit neurobiologischen argumenten. In Analyomen 2, Volume III: Philosophy of Mind, Practical Philosophy. Hawthorne: De Gruyter.   (Google) 
 
1.4d Functionalism about Consciousness




Antony, Michael V. (1994). Against functionalist theories of consciousness. Mind and Language 9 (2):105-23.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 




 
Bode, Boyd H. (1918). Consciousness as behavior. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 15 (17):449-453.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 





 
Dilworth, John (2007). Conscious perceptual experience as representational self-prompting. Journal of Mind and Behavior 28 (2):135-156.   (Google)
Abstract: Journal of Mind and Behavior 28 no. 2 (2007), pp. 135-156. The self-prompting theory of consciousness holds that conscious perceptual experience occurs when non-routine perceptual data prompt the activation of a plan in an executive control system that monitors perceptual input. On the other hand, routine, non-conscious perception merely provides data about the world, which indicatively describes the world correctly or incorrectly. Perceptual experience instead involves data that are about the perceiver, not the world. Their function is that of imperatively prompting the perceiver herself to do something (hence
 
Gregg, John (ms). Functionalism: Can't we just say that consciousness depends on the higher-level organization of a given system?   (Google) 
 
Levin, Janet (1991). Analytic functionalism and the reduction of phenomenal states. Philosophical Studies 61 (March):211-38.   (Cited by 5 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Lormand, Eric (2000). Comments on "a neurofunctional theory of visual consciousness". Consciousness and Cognition 9 (2):260-266.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Macpherson, Fiona (2007). Synaesthesia. In Mario de Caro, Francesco Ferretti & Massimo Marraffa (eds.), Cartographies of the Mind: Philosophy and Psychology in Intersection. Kleuwer.   (Google | More links) 




 
Mangan, Bruce (1998). Against functionalism: Consciousness as an information-bearing medium. In Stuart R. Hameroff, Alfred W. Kaszniak & A. C. Scott (eds.), Toward a Science of Consciousness II. MIT Press.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Marcel, Anthony J. (2000). On a neurofunctional theory of visual consciousness: Commentary on J. Prinz. Consciousness and Cognition 9 (2):267-273.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 







 
Marcel, Anthony J. (1988). Phenomenal experience and functionalism. In Anthony J. Marcel & E. Bisiach (eds.), Consciousness in Contemporary Science. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 50 | Google) 
 
Myin, Erik (1998). Holism, functionalism and visual awareness. Communication and Cognition 31 (1):3-19.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Norris, Orland O. (1929). A behaviorist account of consciousness. II: Its qualitative aspect. Journal of Philosophy 26 (3):57-67.   (Google | More links) 





 
Perlis, Donald R. (1995). Consciousness and complexity: The cognitive Quest. Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence 14:309-21.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 




 
Prinz, Jesse J. (2005). A neurofunctional theory of consciousness. Cognition and the Brain.   (Cited by 10 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Reading the philosophical literature on consciousness, one might get the idea that there is just one problem in consciousness studies, the hard problem. That would be a mistake. There are other problems; some are more tractable, but none are easy, and all interesting. The literature on the hard problem gives the impression that we have made little progress. Consciousness is just an excuse to work and re-work familiar positions on the mind-body problem. But progress is being made elsewhere. Researchers are moving towards increasingly specific accounts of the neural basis of conscious experience. These efforts will leave some questions unanswered, but they are no less significant for that







 
Prinz, Jesse J. (2000). A reply to Marcel. Consciousness and Cognition 9 (2):279-287.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 






 
Prinz, Jesse J. (2000). A reply to Lormand. Consciousness and Cognition 9 (2):274-278.   (Google | More links) 







 
Schweizer, Paul (1996). Physicalism, functionalism, and conscious thought. Minds and Machines 6 (1):61-87.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 




 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1993). Functionalism and consciousness. In Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Consciousness. (Ciba Foundation Symposium 174).   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
van Gulick, Robert (1988). A functionalist plea for self-consciousness. Philosophical Review 97 (April):149-88.   (Cited by 31 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
1.4e Eliminativism about Consciousness




Allport, A. (1988). What concept of consciousness? In Anthony J. Marcel & E. Bisiach (eds.), Consciousness in Contemporary Science. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 47 | Google) 
 
Braddock, Glenn (2002). Eliminativism and indeterminate consciousness. Philosophical Psychology 15 (1):37-54.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: One of Daniel Dennett's most sophisticated arguments for his eliminativism about phenomenological properties centers around the color phi phenomenon. He attempts to show that there is no phenomenological fact of the matter concerning the phenomenon of apparent motion because it is impossible to decide between two competing explanations. I argue that the two explanations considered by Dennett are both based on the assumption that a realist account of the phenomenon must include a neat mapping between phenomenological time and objective time. Since this assumption is false, Dennett's argument is unsuccessful. Like most eliminativist arguments, Dennett's arguments may indicate that the subjective character of experience is different from how it is often described, but this leaves plenty of room for alternative models of consciousness







 
Churchland, Paul M. (1992). Activation vectors versus propositional attitudes: How the brain represents reality. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 52 (2):419-424.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links) 





 
Churchland, Patricia S. (1983). Consciousness: The transmutation of a concept. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 64 (January):80-95.   (Cited by 38 | Annotation | Google)




  
Dennett, Daniel C. (1976). Are dreams experiences? Philosophical Review 73 (April):151-71.   (Cited by 21 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1979). The onus re experiences: A reply to Emmett. Philosophical Studies 35 (April):315-318.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 




 
Nikolinakos, Drakon (1994). General anesthesia, consciousness, and the skeptical challenge. Journal of Philosophy 91 (2):88-104.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 






 
Park Frost, Eliott (1913). The belief in consciousness. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 10 (26):716-719.   (Google | More links) 




 
Rey, Georges (1986). A question about consciousness. In Herbert R. Otto & James A. Tuedio (eds.), Perspectives on Mind. Kluwer.   (Cited by 24 | Annotation | Google)




  
Rey, Georges (1982). A reason for doubting the existence of consciousness. In Richard J. Davidson, Sophie Schwartz & D. H. Shapiro (eds.), Consciousness and Self-Regulation, Vol. 3. New York: Plenum.   (Cited by 22 | Annotation | Google)




  
Rey, Georges (1995). Toward a projectivist account of conscious experience. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Ferdinand Schoningh.   (Cited by 12 | Annotation | Google)




  
Rivas, Titus & van Dongen, Hein (2001). Exit epiphenomenalism: The demolition of a refuge. Revista de Filosofia 57.   (Google) 
 
Robinson, William S. (online). Epiphenomenalism. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.   (Cited by 8 | Google) 
 
Ross, Alf (1941). On the illusion of consciousness. Theoria 7:171-202.   (Google) 
 
Schneider, Susan (2007). Daniel Dennett on the nature of consciousness. In Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Google)
Abstract: One of the most influential philosophical voices in the consciousness studies community is that of Daniel Dennett. Outside of consciousness studies, Dennett is well-known for his work on numerous topics, such as intentionality, artificial intelligence, free will, evolutionary theory, and the basis of religious experience. (Dennett, 1984, 1987, 1995c, 2005) In 1991, just as researchers and philosophers were beginning to turn more attention to the nature of consciousness, Dennett authored his Consciousness Explained. Consciousness Explained aimed to develop both a theory of consciousness and a powerful critique of the then mainstream view of the nature of consciousness, which Dennett called,
 
Smith, David Woodruff (1987). Rey Cogitans: The Unquestionability of Consciousness. In Herbert R. Otto & James A. Tuedio (eds.), Perspectives on Mind. Kluwer.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Sundström, Pär (2008). A somewhat eliminativist proposal about phenomenal consciousness. In Hieke and Leitgeb (ed.), Reduction and Elimination in Philosophy and the Sciences: Papers of the 31st International Wittgenstein Symposium. The Austrian Ludwig Wittgenstein Society.   (Google) 
 
Tienson, John L. (1987). Brains are not conscious. Philosophical Papers 16 (November):187-93.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google)




  
Wilkes, Kathleen V. (1984). Is consciousness important? British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 35 (September):223-43.   (Cited by 14 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 






 
Wilkes, Kathleen V. (1995). Losing consciousness. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Ferdinand Schoningh.   (Cited by 5 | Annotation | Google)




  
Williams, Donald C. (1959). Mind as a matter of fact. Review of Metaphysics 13 (December):205-25.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Williams, Donald C. (1934). Scientific method and the existence of consciousness. Psychological Review 41:461-79.   (Google) 
 
Wilkes, Kathleen V. (1988). Yishi, duh, um and consciousness. In Anthony J. Marcel & E. Bisiach (eds.), Consciousness in Contemporary Science. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 15 | Google) 
 
1.4f Dualism about Consciousness




Aranyosi, Istvan A. (2005). Type-A Dualism: A Novel Theory of the Mental-Physical Nexus. Dissertation, Central European University   (Google) 
 
Banerjee, R.; Bhattacharya, A.; Genc, A. & Arora, B. M. (2006). Structure of twins in gaas nanowires grown by the vapour-liquid-solid process. Philosophical Magazine Letters 86 (12):807-816.   (Google | More links) 






 
Bennett, Karen (ms). 1. dualism.   (Google)
Abstract: Dualists think that not all the facts are physical facts. They think that there are facts about phenomenal consciousness2 that cannot be explained in purely physical terms—facts about what it’s like to see red, what it’s like to feel sandpaper, what it’s like to run 10 miles when it’s 15° F out, and so on. These phenomenal facts are genuine ‘extras’, not fixed by the physical facts and the physical laws. To use the standard metaphor: even after God settled the physical facts and laws, he had more work to do to put the phenomenal facts in place. Some dualists think that the additional work involves the creation of a special kind of nonphysical substance. More common these days are dualists who think that the additional work merely involves the creation and positioning of special nonphysical properties, and that is the only form of dualism that I will be explicitly concerned with here. The property dualist’s claim is that phenomenal properties, or at least protophenomenal properties, are among the basic furniture of the world
 
Bennett, Karen (ms). Why I am not a dualist.   (Google) 
 
Birkett, Kirsten (2006). Conscious objections: God and the consciousness debates. Zygon 41 (2):249-266.   (Google | More links) 





 
Bricke, John (1973). The attribute theory of mind. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 51 (December):226-237.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 







 
Chakraborti, Chhanda (2002). Metaphysics of consciousness, and David Chalmers's property dualism. Journal of Indian Council of Philosophical Research 19 (2):59-84.   (Google) 
 
Chalmers, David J. (2007). Naturalistic dualism. In Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 




 
Dietrich, Eric (1999). Fodor's gloom, or what does it mean that dualism seems true? Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence 11 (2):145-152.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Any time you have philosophers working on a problem, you know you’ve got troubles. If a question has attracted the attention of the philosophers that means that either it is intractably difficult with convolutions and labyrinthine difficulties that would make other researchers blanch, or that it is just flat out impossible to solve. Impossible problems masquerade as intractable problems until someone either proves the problem is impossible (which can only happen in mathematics), or someone shows all solutions to the problem violate laws of physics (like the perpetual motion machine, for example), or until enough people fail so that declaring defeat is a reasonable move. The problem of consciousness is prototypical of this latter case. Indeed, one might say that it is the Platonic ideal of such a problem. The mere fact that philosophers wrestle with the problem of consciousness should be regarded by psychologists of all stripes as extremely bad news. If the philosophers can’t make any headway, psychologists are doomed






 
Dilley, Frank B. (2004). Taking consciousness seriously: A defense of cartesian dualism. International Journal for Philosophy of Religion 55 (3):135-153.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 







 
Eccles, John C. (1987). Brain and mind: Two or one? In Colin Blakemore & Susan A. Greenfield (eds.), Mindwaves. Blackwell.   (Cited by 9 | Google) 
 
Foster, John A. (1989). A defense of dualism. In J. Smythies & John Beloff (eds.), The Case for Dualism. University of Virginia Press.   (Cited by 9 | Annotation | Google)




  
Göcke, Benedikt Paul (2009). From Physicalism to Theological Idealism. In Martina Fürst, Wolfgang Gombocz & Christian Hiebaum (eds.), Gehirne und Personen. ontos.   (Google)
Abstract: In the first part elements and entailments of an adequate thesis of physicalism are presented. In the second part an argument against these is elaborated. Based on this argument a thesis of theological idealism is sketched.
 
Goldstein, Irwin (1996). Ontology, epistemology, and private ostensive definition. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 56 (1):137-147.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: People see five kinds of views in epistemology and ontology as hinging on there being words a person can learn only by private ostensive definitions, through direct acquaintance with his own sensations: skepticism about other minds, 2. skepticism about an external world, 3. foundationalism, 4. dualism, and 5. phenomenalism. People think Wittgenstein refuted these views by showing, they believe, no word is learnable only by private ostensive definition. I defend these five views from Wittgenstein’s attack.






 
Grigg, Rowan (ms). Longing for Integration.   (Google)
Abstract: A lighthearted look at some big themes in metaphysics and epistemology
 
Honderich, Ted (1981). Nomological dualism: Reply to four critics. Inquiry 24 (December):419-438.   (Google)
Abstract: Three theses about the mind, when conjoined with a certain understanding of lawlike connection, escape the objection that they constitute an epiphenomenalism and so conflict with our conviction of the efficacy of the mental. Certain alternatives to the given picture of the mind, one of them an Identity Theory, are in various respects less defensible. The given picture can be defended against considerations deriving from a contextual conception of the mental, and from an elaborated objection having to do with the holism of the mental. The Identity Theory mentioned above appears to be inconsistent, and a further picture of the mind, with very different presuppositions, has the disability among others that it does not provide for mental efficacy. Also, the presuppositions raise great problems
 
Honderich, Ted (1981). Psychophysical law-like connections and their problems. Inquiry 24 (October):277-303.   (Cited by 5 | Annotation | Google)




  
Kind, Amy (2005). The irreducibility of consciousness. Disputatio 1 (19).   (Google) 
 
Lahav, Ran & Shanks, N. (1992). How to be a scientifically respectable 'property dualist'. Journal of Mind and Behavior 13 (3):211-32.   (Cited by 5 | Annotation | Google)




  
Latham, Noa (1998). Chalmers on the addition of consciousness to the physical world. Philosophical Studies 98 (1):71-97.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links) 






 
Lowe, E. J. (2005). Uwe Meixner, the two sides of being: A reassessment of psycho-physical dualism, paderborn, mentis, 2004, 486 pp. ISBN: 3-89785-376-. Erkenntnis 62 (2).   (Google) 
 
Lycan, William G. (2007). Recent naturalistic dualisms. In E. Meyers, R. Styers & A. Lange (eds.), Light Against Darkness: Dualism in Ancient Mediterranean Religion and the Contemporary World. Brill Academic Publishers.   (Google)
Abstract: This paper is about a certain family of philosophical positions on the mind-body problem. The positions are dualist, but only in a minimal sense of that term employed by philosophers: according to the positions in question, mental entities are immaterial and distinct from all physical things
 
Macpherson, Fiona (2006). Property dualism and the merits of solutions to the mind-body problem: A reply to Strawson. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (s 10-11):72-89.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper is divided into two main sections. The first articulates what I believe Strawson's position to be. I contrast Strawson's usage of 'physicalism' with the mainstream use. I then explain why I think that Strawson's position is one of property dualism and substance monism. In doing this, I outline his view and Locke's view on the nature of substance. I argue that they are similar in many respects and thus it is no surprise that Strawson actually holds a view on the mind much like one plausible interpretation of Locke's position. Strawson's use of terminology cloaks this fact and he does not himself explicitly recognize it in his paper. In the second section, I outline some of Strawson's assumptions that he uses in arguing for his position. I comment on the plausibility of his position concerning the relation of the mind to the body compared with mainstream physicalism and various forms of dualism. Before embarking on the two main sections, in the remainder of this introduction, I very briefly sketch Strawson's view







 
McGinn, Colin (1993). Consciousness and cosmology: Hyperdualism ventilated. In Martin Davies & Glyn W. Humphreys (eds.), Consciousness: Psychological and Philosophical Essays. Blackwell.   (Cited by 9 | Annotation | Google)




  
Meixner, Uwe (2004). The Two Sides of Being: A Reassessment of Psychophysical Dualism. Mentis.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Molenaar, Peter C. M. (2006). Psychophysical dualism from the point of view of a working psychologist. Erkenntnis 65 (1):47-69.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Cognitive neuroscience constitutes the third phase of development of the field of cognitive psychophysiology since it was established about half a century ago. A critical historical overview is given of this development, focusing on recurring problems that keep frustrating great expectations. It is argued that psychology has to regain its independent status with respect to cognitive neuroscience and should take psychophysical dualism seriously. A constructive quantum physical model for psychophysical interaction is presented, based on a new stochastic interpretation of the quantum potential in the de Broglie






 
Pauen, Michael (2000). Painless pain: Property dualism and the causal role of phenomenal consciousness. American Philosophical Quarterly 37 (1):51-64.   (Cited by 8 | Google) 
 
Ross, Don (2005). Chalmers's Naturalistic Dualism: The Irrelevance of the Mind-Body Problem to the Scientific Study of Consciousness. In Christina E. Erneling & David Martel Johnson (eds.), The Mind As a Scientific Object: Between Brain and Culture. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Rosenberg, Jay F. (1988). On not knowing what or who one is: Reflections on the intelligibility of dualism. Topoi 7 (March):57-63.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 




 
Smook, Roger (1988). Egoicity and twins. Dialogue 27:277-86.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Smythies, J. R. & Beloff, John (eds.) (1989). The Case for Dualism. University of Virginia Press.   (Cited by 9 | Google) 
 
Sprigge, Timothy L. S. (1994). Consciousness. Synthese 98 (1):73-93.   (Cited by 5 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Steinberg, Jesse R. & Steinberg, Alan M. (2007). Disembodied minds and the problem of identification and individuation. Philosophia 35 (1).   (Google)
Abstract:   We consider and reject a variety of attempts to provide a ground for identifying and differentiating disembodied minds. Until such a ground is provided, we must withhold inclusion of disembodied minds from our picture of the world
 
Strong, Charles A. (1934). A plea for substantialism in psychology. Journal of Philosophy 31 (12):309-328.   (Google | More links) 





 
Taliaferro, Charles (1996). Consciousness and the Mind of God. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 15 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This book defends a nonmaterialistic view of persons and subjectivity and the intelligibility of thinking of God as a nonphysical, spiritual reality.








 
Taliaferro, Charles (2001). Emergentism and consciousness: Going beyond property dualism. In Soul, Body, and Survival: Essays on the Metaphysics of Human Persons. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Vendler, Zeno (1994). The ineffable soul. In The Mind-Body Problem: A Guide to the Current Debate. Cambridge: Blackwell.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
von Wright, Georg Henrik (1994). On mind and matter. Journal of Theoretical Biology 171:101-10.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Weslake, Brad, Review of understanding phenomenal consciousness.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In recent philosophy of mind, epiphenomenalism—that strain of dualism according to which the mind is caused by the body but does not cause the body in turn—has undergone something of a renaissance. Contemporary epiphenomenalists bear only partial resemblance to their more extravagantly metaphysical ancestors, however. Traditional epiphenomenalists thought that (at least) two sorts of mental properties were epiphenomenal—intentional properties such as the meaning or representational content of the propositional attitudes (beliefs, desires and so on); and conscious properties such as awareness and the qualitative nature of experience. Contemporary epiphenomenalists, on the other hand, are largely sanguine about the prospects for intentionality to be brought within the purview of a physicalist worldview; what forces their dualism is one particular feature of consciousness—what irks them are qualia, the..





 
Wetherick, Norman E. (1992). Velmans on consciousness, brain and the physical world. Philosophical Psychology 5 (2):159-161.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
1.4g Panpsychism




Armstrong, Susan (2006). For love of matter: A contemporary panpsychism. Environmental Ethics 28 (1):99-102.   (Google) 
 
Arp, Robert (2007). Consciousness and awareness - switched-on rheostats: A response to de Quincey. Journal of Consciousness Studies 14 (3):101-106.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: I question whether it is completely accurate to think of the philosophical meaning of consciousness as being switched-on or switched-off. It may be that, once consciousness is switched-on, it is then found in degrees in animals we deem conscious. In which case, consciousness is more like a switched-on rheostat, rather than a simple on-off switch. Christian de Quincey (2006) gives a list of what would be considered the marks of consciousness, including 'experience, subjectivity, sentience, feeling, or mentality of any kind'. He also seems to conflate awareness with experience when speaking about the light of consciousness being on. In keeping with de Quincey's desire to get clear about the meaning of consciousness, I will put forward an idea of consciousness as the experience of oneself as a being subject to past, present, and future events, and contrast this idea with a state of awareness. De Quincey claims that 'any entity that is a subject -- that feels its own being -- possesses consciousness'. I want to add to this meaning of consciousness by noting the subject's sense of temporality, so as to further qualify the meaning of consciousness and show how awareness is distinct from consciousness





 
Basile, Pierfrancesco (2009). Back to Whitehead? Galen Strawson and the Rediscovery of Panpsychism. In David Skrbina (ed.), Mind that Abides. Panpsychism in the new millennium. John Benjamins Publishing Company.   (Google) 
 
Beaton, Michael; Bricklin, J.; Charland, Louis C.; Edwards, JCW; Farber, Ilya B.; Faw, Bill; Gennaro, Rocco J.; Kaernbach, C.; Nunn, C. M. H.; Panksepp, Jaak; Prinz, Jesse J.; Ratcliffe, Matthew; Ross, Jacob J.; Murray, S.; Stapp, Henry P. & Watt, Douglas F. (2006). Switched-on consciousness - clarifying what it means - response to de Quincey. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (4):7-12.   (Google) 
 
Birch, Charles (1999). Why I became a panexperientialist. Australasian Association for Process Thought.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 




 
Bishop, Michael A. (2003). Dancing with pixies: Strong artificial intelligence and panpsychism. In John M. Preston & Michael A. Bishop (eds.), Views Into the Chinese Room: New Essays on Searle and Artificial Intelligence. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Bjelland, Andrew G. (1982). Popper's critique of panpsychism and process proto-mentalism. Modern Schoolman 59 (May):233-43.   (Google) 
 
Butler, Clark W. (1978). Panpsychism: A restatement of the genetic argument. Idealist Studies 8 (January):33-39.   (Google) 
 
Calvert, Ernest Reid (1942). The Panpsychism of James Ward and Charles A. Strong. [Boston].   (Google) 
 
Carruthers, Peter & Schechter, Elizabeth (2006). Can panpsychism bridge the explanatory gap? Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11):32-39.   (Google | More links) 




 
Casati, Roberto (2003). Qualia domesticated. In Amita Chatterjee (ed.), Perspectives on Consciousness. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.   (Google | More links) 






 
Chalmers, David J. (1996). Is experience ubiquitous? In The Conscious Mind. Oxford University Press.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Chalmers, David J. (online). What is it like to be a thermostat? (Commentary on Dan Lloyd, "what is it like to be a net?").   (Google)
Abstract: The project that Dan Lloyd has undertaken is admirable and audacious. He has tried to boil down the substrate of information-processing that underlies conscious experience to some very simple elements, in order to gain a better understanding of the phenomenon. Some people will suspect that by considering a model as simple as a connectionist network, Dan has thrown away everything that is interesting about consciousness. Perhaps there is something to that complaint, but I will take a different tack. It seems to me that if we apply his own reasoning, we can see that Dan has not taken things far _enough_. When we have boiled things down to a system as simple as a connectionist network, it seems faint-hearted to stop there, and perhaps a little arbitrary as well. So I will take things further, and ask what seems to be the really interesting question in the vicinity: what is it like to be a thermostat?
 
Clarke, David S. (2002). Panpsychism and the philosophy of Charles Hartshorne. Journal of Speculative Philosophy 16 (3):151-166.   (Google | More links) 




 
Clarke, D. S. (2003). Panpsychism and the Religious Attitude. State University of New York Press.   (Google) 
 
Cobb, John B. & Thorpe, William H. (1977). Some Whiteheadian comments on the discussion. In John B. Cobb & David Ray Griffin (eds.), Mind in Nature. University Press of America.   (Google) 
 
Coleman, Sam (2006). Being realistic - why physicalism may entail panexperientialism. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11):40-52.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper I first examine two important assumptions underlying the argument that physicalism entails panpsychism. These need unearthing because opponents in the literature distinguish themselves from Strawson in the main by rejecting one or the other. Once they have been stated, and something has been said about the positions that reject them, the onus of argument becomes clear: the assumptions require careful defence. I believe they are true, in fact, but their defence is a large project that cannot begin here. So, in the final section I comment on what follows if they are granted. I agree with Strawson that --broadly -- 'panpsychism' is the direction in which philosophy of mind should be heading; nevertheless, there are certain difficulties in the detail of his position. In light of these I argue for changes to the doctrine, bringing it into line with the slightly





 
Coleman, Sam (2009). Mind under Matter. In David Skrbina (ed.), Mind that Abides. Benjamins.   (Google) 
 
de Quincey, Christian (1994). Consciousness all the way down? An analysis of McGinn's critique of panexperientialism. Journal of Consciousness Studies 1 (2):217-229.   (Cited by 9 | Google) 
 
de Quincey, Christian (2002). Radical Nature: Rediscovering the Soul of Matter. Invisible Cities Press.   (Cited by 14 | Google) 
 
de Quincey, Christian (2006). Switched-on consciousness - clarifying what it means. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (4):7-12.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: 'Consciousness' has been called the 'final frontier' for science, philosophy's 'hard problem', and the greatest mystery in mysticism. It is a central focus in philosophy of mind. Yet confusion abounds about what 'consciousness' means -- even among philosophers, scientists, and mystics who have built careers exploring the mind. Different scholars and different disciplines use the same word to mean very different things. Debates and dialogues on consciousness often run aground because scholars conflate two radically different uses of the term. This paper addresses the problem by elucidating a fundamental distinction between the philosophical and psychological uses of 'consciousness'





 
Drake, Durant (1919). Panpsychism again. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 16 (16):433-439.   (Google | More links) 





 
Edwards, Jonathan C. W. (2006). How Many People Are There in My Head and in Hers? An Exploration of Single Cell Consciousness. Exeter: Imprint Academic.   (Google) 
 
Edwards, Paul (1967). Panpsychism. In Paul Edwards (ed.), The Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Volume 5. Collier-Macmillan.   (Cited by 7 | Annotation | Google)




  
Farleigh, P. (1998). Whitehead's even more dangerous idea. In Stuart R. Hameroff, Alfred W. Kaszniak & A. C. Scott (eds.), Toward a Science of Consciousness II. MIT Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Ford, Lewis S. (1995). Panpsychism and the early history of prehension. Process Studies 24:15-33.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Ford, Marcus P. (1981). William James: Panpsychist and metaphysical realist. Transactions of the Peirce Society 17:158-70.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Franck, Georg (2008). Presence and reality: An option to specify panpsychism ? Mind and Matter 6 (1):123-140.   (Google)
Abstract: Panpsychism is the doctrine that mind is a fundamental feature of the world existing throughout the universe. One problem with panpsychism is that it is a purely theoretical concept so far. For progress towards an operationalization of the idea, this paper suggests to make use of an ontological difference involved in the mind-matter distinction. The mode in which mental phenomena exist is called presence. The mode in which matter and radiation exist is called reality Physical theory disregards presence in both the form of mental presence and the form of the temporal present In contrast to mental presence the temporal present is objective in the perspective of the third person. This relative kind of objectivity waits to be utilized for a hypothesis of how the mental and the physical are interrelated In order to do so this paper translates the mind-matter distinction into the distinction between mental and physical time and addresses the problem that panpsychism tries to attack head-on in these temporal terms. There are in particular , two issues thus getting involved: discussions about a time observable and the quantum Zeno effect
 
Freeman, Anthony (2006). Consciousness and Its Place in Nature: Does Physicalism Entail Panpsychism? Exeter: Imprint Academic.   (Google) 
 
Frisina, Warren G. (1997). Minds, bodies, experience, nature: Is panpsychism really dead? In Pragmatism, Neo-Pragmatism, and Religion. New York: Lang.   (Google) 
 
Gabora, Liane (2002). Amplifying phenomenal information: Toward a fundamental theory of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 9 (8):3-29.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: from non-conscious components by positing that consciousness is a universal primitive. For example, the double aspect theory of information holds that infor- mation has a phenomenal aspect. How then do you get from phenomenal infor- mation to human consciousness? This paper proposes that an entity is conscious to the extent it amplifies information, first by trapping and integrating it through closure, and second by maintaining dynamics at the edge of chaos through simul- taneous processes of divergence and convergence. The origin of life through autocatalytic closure, and the origin of an interconnected worldview through conceptual closure, induced phase transitions in the degree to which informa- tion, and thus consciousness, is locally amplified. Divergence and convergence of cognitive information may involve phenomena observed in light e.g. focusing, interference, and resonance. By making information flow inward- biased, clo- sure shields us from external consciousness; thus the paucity of consciousness may be an illusion











 
Gao, Shan (2003). A possible quantum basis of panpsychism. [Journal (Paginated)] 1 (1):4-9.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: We show that consciousness may violate the basic quantum principle, according to which the nonorthogonal quantum states can't be distinguished. This implies that the physical world is not causally closed without consciousness, and consciousness is a fundamental property of matter, thus provides a possible quantum basis for panpsychism







 
Gao, Shan (2003). A possible quantum basis of panpsychism. Cogprints.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: We show that consciousness may violate the basic quantum principle, according to which the nonorthogonal quantum states can't be distinguished. This implies that the physical world is not causally closed without consciousness, and consciousness is a fundamental property of matter, thus provides a possible quantum basis for panpsychism





 
Gao, Mr Shan (ms). Quantum, consciousness and panpsychism: A solution to the hard problem.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: We analyze the results and implications of the combination of quantum and consciousness in terms of the recent QSC analysis. The quantum effect of consciousness is first explored. We show that the consciousness of the observer can help to distinguish the nonorthogonal states under some condition, while the usual physical measuring device without consciousness can’t. The result indicates that the causal efficacies of consciousness do exist when considering the basic quantum process. Based on this conclusion, we demonstrate that consciousness is not reducible or emergent, but a new fundamental property of matter. This provides a quantum basis for panpsychism. Furthermore, we argue that the conscious process is one kind of quantum computation process based on the analysis of consciousness time and combination problem. It is shown that a unified theory of matter and consciousness should include two parts: one is the complete quantum evolution of matter state, which includes the definite nonlinear evolution element introduced by consciousness, and the other is the psychophysical principle or corresponding principle between conscious content and matter state. Lastly, some experimental suggestions are presented to confirm the theoretical analysis of the paper








 
Goff, Philip (2006). Experiences don't sum. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11):53-61.   (Google | More links) 





 
Goff, Philip (2009). Why panpsychism doesn't help us explain consciousness. Dialectica 63 (3):289-311.   (Google)
Abstract: This paper starts from the assumption that panpsychism is counterintuitive and metaphysically demanding. A number of philosophers, whilst not denying these negative aspects of the view, think that panpsychism has in its favour that it offers a good explanation of consciousness. In opposition to this, the paper argues that panpsychism cannot help us to explain consciousness, at least not the kind of consciousness we have pre-theoretical reason to believe in
 
Griffin, David Ray (1998). Pantemporalism and panexperientialism. In P. Harris (ed.), The Textures of Time. University of Michigan Press.   (Google) 
 
Griffin, David Ray (1997). Panexperiential physicalism and the mind-body problem. Journal of Consciousness Studies 4 (3):248-68.   (Google) 
 
Griffin, David Ray (1998). Unsnarling the World-Knot: Consciousness, Freedom, and the Mind-Body Problem. University of California Press.   (Cited by 57 | Google) 
 
Hartshorne, Charles (1977). Physics and psychics: The place of mind in nature. In John B. Cobb & David Ray Griffin (eds.), Mind in Nature. University Press of America.   (Cited by 9 | Google) 
 
Hartshorne, Charles (1978). Panpsychism: Mind as sole reality. Ultim Real Mean 1:115-29.   (Cited by 10 | Google) 
 
Heidelberger, Michael & Klohr, Cynthia (2004). Nature From Within: Gustav Theodor Fechner and His Psychophysical Worldview. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.   (Cited by 8 | Google)
Abstract: Michael Heidelberger's exhaustive exploration of Fechner's writings, in relation to current issues in the field, successfully reestablishes Fechner'...
 
Holman, Emmett (2008). Panpsychism, physicalism, neutral monism and the Russellian theory of mind. Journal of Consciousness Studies 15 (5):48-67.   (Google)
Abstract: As some see it, an impasse has been reached on the mind- body problem between mainstream physicalism and mainstream dualism. So lately another view has been gaining popularity, a view that might be called the 'Russellian theory of mind' (RTM) since it is inspired by some ideas once put forth by Bertrand Russell. Most versions of RTM are panpsychist, but there is at least one version that rejects panpsychism and styles itself as physicalism, and neutral monism is also a possibility. In this paper I will attempt to sort out these different versions with a view to determining which, if any, have a chance of breaking the perceived impasse. The unsurprising conclusion will be that there are a lot of challenges ahead for the RTM theorist. The surprising conclusion will be that it's not clear that pan- psychist RTM holds an advantage over the other versions in this regard
 
Hut, Piet & Shepard, Roger N. (1996). Turning the "hard problem" upside-down and sideways. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (4):313-29.   (Cited by 15 | Annotation | Google)




  
Jackson, Frank (2006). Galen Strawson on panpsychism. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11):62-64.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: We make powerful motor cars by suitably assembling items that are not themselves powerful, but we do not do this by 'adding in the power' at the very end of the assembly line; nor, if it comes to that, do we add portions of power along the way. Powerful motor cars are nothing over and above complex arrangements or aggregations of items that are not themselves powerful. The example illustrates the way aggregations can have interesting properties that the items aggregated lack. What can we say of a general kind about what can be made from what by nothing over and above aggregation? I think that this is the key issue that Galen Strawson (2006) puts so





 
Kim, Jaegwon (1999). Physicalism and panexperientialism: Response to David Ray Griffin. Process Studies 28 (1-2):28-34.   (Google) 
 
Kind, Amy (2006). Panexperientialism, cognition, and the nature of experience. Psyche 12 (5).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: i>: This paper explores the plausibility of panexperientialism by an examination of Gregg Rosenberg






 
Macpherson, Fiona (2006). Property dualism and the merits of solutions to the mind-body problem: A reply to Strawson. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (s 10-11):72-89.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper is divided into two main sections. The first articulates what I believe Strawson's position to be. I contrast Strawson's usage of 'physicalism' with the mainstream use. I then explain why I think that Strawson's position is one of property dualism and substance monism. In doing this, I outline his view and Locke's view on the nature of substance. I argue that they are similar in many respects and thus it is no surprise that Strawson actually holds a view on the mind much like one plausible interpretation of Locke's position. Strawson's use of terminology cloaks this fact and he does not himself explicitly recognize it in his paper. In the second section, I outline some of Strawson's assumptions that he uses in arguing for his position. I comment on the plausibility of his position concerning the relation of the mind to the body compared with mainstream physicalism and various forms of dualism. Before embarking on the two main sections, in the remainder of this introduction, I very briefly sketch Strawson's view







 
Madell, Goeffrey (2007). Timothy Sprigge and panpsychism. In Pierfrancesco Basile & Leemon B. McHenry (eds.), Consciousness, Reality and Value: Essays in Honour of T.L.S. Sprigge. Ontos.   (Google) 
 
Mander, W. J. (2007). David Skrbina: Panpsychism in the west. Faith and Philosophy 24 (2):239-241.   (Google) 
 
McHenry, Leemon B. (1995). Whitehead's panpsychism as the subjectivity of prehension. Process Studies 24:1-14.   (Google) 
 
McKitrick, Jennifer (2006). Rosenberg on causation. Psyche 12 (5).   (Google)
Abstract: This paper is an explication and critique of a new theory of causation found in part II of Gregg Rosenberg's _A Place for Consciousness._ According to Rosenberg's Theory of Causal significance, causation constrains indeterminate possibilities, and according to his Carrier Theory, physical properties are dispositions which have phenomenal properties as their causal bases. This author finds Rosenberg's metaphysics excessively speculative, with disappointing implications for the place of consciousness in the natural world
 
Montague, William P. (1905). Panpsychism and monism. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 2 (23):626-629.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Nagasawa, Yujin (2006). A place for protoconsciousness? Psyche 12 (5).   (Google | More links) 





 
Nagel, Thomas (1979). Panpsychism. In Thomas Nagel (ed.), Mortal Questions. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 18 | Annotation | Google)




  
Neunhäuserer, Jörg (ms). Panmentalism.   (Google)
Abstract: In this short note we develop an unorthodox panmentalistic and libertarian dualism. Especially we skech a mental-physikal law of free will. Our aim is to to provoke the contemporary scentific common-sense.
 
Nimtz, Christian & Schutte, M. (2003). On physicalism, physical properties, and panpsychism. Dialectica 57 (4):413-22.   (Google | More links) 




 
Nixon, Gregory (2010). From Panexperientialism to Conscious Experience: The Continuum of Experience. Journal of Consciousness Exploration and Research (3):216-233.   (Google)
Abstract: When so much is being written on conscious experience, it is past time to face the question whether experience happens that is not conscious of itself. The recognition that we and most other living things experience non-consciously has recently been firmly supported by experimental science, clinical studies, and theoretic investigations; the related if not identical philosophic notion of experience without a subject has a rich pedigree. Leaving aside the question of how experience could become conscious of itself, I aim here to demonstrate that the terms experience and consciousness are not interchangeable. Experience is a notoriously difficult concept to pin down, but I see non-conscious experience as based mainly in momentary sensations, relational between bodies or systems, and probably common throughout the natural world. If this continuum of experience — from non-conscious, to conscious, to self-transcending awareness — can be understood and accepted, radical constructivism (the “outside” world as a construct of experience) will gain a firmer foundation, panexperientialism (a living universe) may gain credibility, and psi will find its medium.
 
Papineau, David (2006). Comments on Galen Strawson: Realistic Monism: Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11):100-109.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Galen Strawson (2006) thinks it is 'obviously' false that 'the terms of physics can fully capture the nature or essence of experience' (p. 4). He also describes this view as 'crazy' (p. 7). I think that he has been carried away by first impressions. It is certainly true that 'physicSalism', as he dubs this view, is strongly counterintuitive. But at the same time there are compelling arguments in its favour. I think that these arguments are sound and that the contrary intuitions are misbegotten. In the first two sections of my remarks I would like to spend a little time defending physicSalism, or 'straightforward' physicalism, as I shall call it ('S' for 'straightforward', if you like). I realize that the main topic of Strawson's paper is panpsychism rather than his rejection of straightforward physicalism. But the latter is relevant as his arguments for panpsychism depend on his rejection of straightforward physicalism, in ways I shall explain below






 
Pearce, David (online). Naturalistic panpsychism.   (Google) 
 
Polger, Thomas W. (2006). A place for dogs and trees? Psyche 12 (5).   (Google)
Abstract: Rosenberg does not provide arguments for some crucial premises in his argument against physicalism. In particular, he gives no independent argument to show that physicalists must accept the entry-by-entailment thesis. The arguments provided establish weaker premises than those that are needed. As a consequence, Rosenberg
 
Popper, Karl R. (1977). Some remarks on panpsychism and epiphenomenalism. Dialectica 31:177-86.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Prince, Morton (1904). The identification of mind and matter. Philosophical Review 13 (4):444-451.   (Google | More links) 





 
Rensch, Bernhard (1977). Argument for panpsychist identism. In John B. Cobb & David Ray Griffin (eds.), Mind in Nature. University Press of America.   (Google) 
 
Rey, Georges (2006). Better to study human than world psychology - commentary on Galen Strawson's Realistic Monism: Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11):110-116.   (Google) 
 
Robinson, Elmo A. (1949). Animism as a world hypothesis. Philosophical Review 58 (January):53-63.   (Google | More links) 





 
Rosenberg, Gregg H. (2004). A Place for Consciousness: Probing the Deep Structure of the Natural World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 43 | Google | More links)
Abstract: What place does consciousness have in the natural world? If we reject materialism, could there be a credible alternative? In one classic example, philosophers ask whether we can ever know what is it is like for bats to sense the world using sonar. It seems obvious to many that any amount of information about a bat's physical structure and information processing leaves us guessing about the central questions concerning the character of its experience. A Place for Consciousness begins with reflections on the existence of this gap. Is it just a psychological shortcoming in our merely human understanding of the physical world? Is it a trivial consequence of the simple fact that we just cannot be bats? Or does it mean there really are facts about consciousness over and above the physical facts? If so, what does consciousness do? Why does it exist? Rosenberg sorts out these problems, especially those centering on the causal role of consciousness. He introduces a new paradigm called Liberal Naturalism for thinking about what causation is, about the natural world, and about how to create a detailed model to go along with the new paradigm. Arguing that experience is part of the categorical foundations of causality, he shows that within this new paradigm there is a place for something essentially like consciousness in all its traditional mysterious respects. A striking feature of Liberal Naturalism is that its central tenets are motivated independently of the mind-body problem, by analyzing causation itself. Because of this approach, when consciousness shows up in the picture it is not introduced in an ad hoc way, and its most puzzling features can be explained from first principles. Ultimately, Rosenberg's final solution gives consciousness a causally important role without supposing either that it is physical or that it interacts with the physical





 
Rosenthal, David M. (2006). Experience and the physical. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11):117-28.   (Google | More links) 





 
Rosenberg, Gregg H. (2004). On the possibility of panexperientialism. In Gregg H. Rosenberg (ed.), A Place for Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Rosenberg, Gregg H. (1996). Rethinking nature: A hard problem within the hard problem. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (1):76-88.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google)




  
Rudd, Anthony (2006). Panpsychism in the west. Review of Metaphysics 60 (2):422-424.   (Google) 
 
Salter, William M. (1922). Panpsychism and freedom. Philosophical Review 31 (3):285-287.   (Google | More links) 





 
Schütte, Christian Nimtz/Michael (2003). Notes and discussions. On physicalism, physical properties, and panpsychism. Dialectica 57 (4):413–422.   (Google | More links) 




 
Seager, William E. (1995). Consciousness, information, and panpsychism. Journal of Consciousness Studies 2:272-88.   (Cited by 20 | Annotation | Google)




  
Seager, William E. (online). Panpsychism. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links)
Abstract: 1 Non-reductive physicalists deny that there is any explanation of mentality in purely physical terms, but do not deny that the mental is entirely determined by and constituted out of underlying physical structures. There are important issues about the stability of such a view which teeters on the edge of explanatory reductionism on the one side and dualism on the other (see Kim 1998). 2 Save perhaps for eliminative materialism (see Churchland 1981 for a classic exposition). In fact, however, while





 
Seager, William E. (2006). Rosenberg, reducibility and consciousness. Psyche.   (Google | More links) 




 
Seager, William E. (2006). The 'intrinsic nature' argument for panpsychism. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11):129-145.   (Google | More links) 






 
Seager, William E. (ms). Whitehead and the revival (?) Of panpsychism.   (Google) 
 
Sellars, Roy Wood (1960). Panpsychism or evolutionary materialism. Philosophy of Science 27 (October):329-49.   (Google | More links) 






 
Sevush, Steven (ms). Single-neuron theory of consciousness.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: By most accounts, the mind arises from the integrated activity of large populations of neurons distributed across multiple brain regions. A contrasting model is presented in the present paper that places the mind/brain interface not at the whole brain level but at the level of single neurons. Specifically, it is proposed that each neuron in the nervous system is independently conscious, with conscious content corresponding to the spatial pattern of a portion of that neuron's dendritic electrical activity. For most neurons, such as those in the hypothalamus or posterior sensory cortices, the conscious activity would be assumed to be simple and unable to directly affect the organism's macroscopic conscious behavior. For a subpopulation of layer 5 pyramidal neurons in the lateral prefrontal cortices, however, an arrangement is proposed to be present such that, at any given moment: i) the spatial pattern of electrical activity in a portion of the dendritic tree of each neuron in the subpopulation individually manifests a complexity and diversity sufficient to account for the complexity and diversity of conscious experience; ii) the dendritic trees of the neurons in the subpopulation all contain similar spatial electrical patterns; iii) the spatial electrical pattern in the dendritic tree of each neuron interacts nonlinearly with the remaining ambient dendritic electrical activity to determine the neuron's overall axonal response; iv) the dendritic spatial pattern is reexpressed at the population level by the spatial pattern exhibited by a synchronously firing subgroup of the conscious neurons, thereby providing a mechanism by which conscious activity at the neuronal level can influence overall behavior. The resulting scheme is one in which conscious behavior appears to be the product of a single macroscopic mind, but is actually the integrated output of a chorus of minds, each associated with a different neuron












 
Sharpe, R. A. (1989). Dennett's journey towards panpsychism. Inquiry 32 (2):233-40.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Shepherd, John J. (1974). Panpsychism and parsimony. Process Studies 4:3-10.   (Google) 
 
Shields, George W. (2001). Physicalist panexperientialism and the mind-body problem. American Journal of Theology and Philosophy 22 (2):133-154.   (Google) 
 
Skrbina, David (2006). Beyond Descartes: Panpsychism revisited. Axiomathes 16 (4).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: For some two millennia, Western civilization has predominantly viewed mind and consciousness as the private domain of the human species. Some have been willing to extend these qualities to certain animals. And there has been a small but very significant minority of philosophers who have argued that the processes of mind are universal in extent, and resident in all material things





 
Skrbina, David (ed.) (2009). Mind That Abides: Panpsychism in the New Millennium. John Benjamins Pub..   (Google)
Abstract: other distinct subjects is famously difficult (see James 1890: 1.160-161; Goff 2006) but I cannot avoid the difficulty in the way Coleman can (2006:48—50), ...
 
Skrbina, David (2003). Panpsychism as an underlying theme in western philosophy: A survey paper. Journal of Consciousness Studies 10 (3):4-46.   (Cited by 11 | Google | More links) 




 
Skrbina, David (online). Panpsychism. Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.   (Google) 
 
Skrbina, David (2005). Panpsychism in the West. MIT Press.   (Cited by 13 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Skrbina argues that panpsychism is long overdue for detailed treatment, and with this book he proposes to add impetus to the discussion of panpsychism in...








 
Skrbina, David (2006). Realistic panpsychism - commentary on Strawson. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11):151-157.   (Google | More links) 




 
Sprigge, Timothy L. S. (1998). Panpsychism. In Edward Craig (ed.), Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Routledge.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Sprigge, Timothy L. S. (1983). The vindication of panpsychism. In T. L. S. Sprigge (ed.), The Vindication of Absolute Idealism. Edinburgh University Press.   (Google) 
 
Stoljar, Daniel (2006). Comments on Galen Strawson - 'realistic monism: Why physicalism entails panpsychism. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11):170-176.   (Google | More links) 




 
Strawson, Galen (2006). Panpsychism? Reply to commentators with a celebration of Descartes. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11):184-280.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 




 
Strawson, Galen (2006). Realistic monism - why physicalism entails panpsychism. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11):3-31.   (Cited by 10 | Google | More links) 




 
Strong, Charles Augustus (1918). The Origin of Consciousness: An Attempt to Conceive the Mind as a Product of Evolution. MacMillan and Co..   (Google) 
 
Stubenberg, Leopold (2007). Review of Galen Strawson et al., Consciousness and its Place in Nature: Does Physicalism Entail Panpsychism?. Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews 2007 (5).   (Google) 
 
Turner, J. E. (1919). Dr. strong's panpsychic theory of consciousness and perception. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 16 (16):428-433.   (Google | More links) 





 
Unknown, Unknown (online). Panpsychism.   (Google) 
 
van Cleve, James (1990). Mind-dust or magic? Panpsychism versus emergence. Philosophical Perspectives 4:215-226.   (Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Van Cleve, James (1990). Mind--dust or magic? Panpsychism versus emergence. Philosophical Perspectives 4:215-226.   (Google | More links) 




 
Various,  (2006). Peer commentary: Response to de Quincey. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (4):13-36.   (Google)
Abstract: Short commentaries on Christian de Quincey' paper by Michael Beaton, Jonathan Bricklin, Louis Charland, Jonathan Edwards, Ilya Farber, Bill Faw, Rocco Gennaro, Christian Kaernbach, Chris Nunn, Jaak Panksepp, Jesse Prinz, Matthew Ratcliffe, J. Andrew Ross, Murray Shanahan, Henry Stapp, Douglas Watt
 
Wolfson, Harry A. (1937). Spinoza's mechanism, attributes, and panpsychism. Philosophical Review 46 (3):307-314.   (Google | More links) 




 
Wright, Sewall (1953). Gene and organism. American Naturalist 87 (832):5-18.   (Cited by 13 | Google | More links) 





 
Wright, Sewall (1977). Panpsychism and science. In John B. Cobb & David Ray Griffin (eds.), Mind in Nature. University Press of America.   (Cited by 9 | Google) 
 
1.4h Russellian Monism




Banks, Erik C. (2010). Neutral Monism Reconsidered. Philosophical Psychology 23 (2):173-187.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Should neutral monism be reconsidered? Classic NM (Mach James Russell) is examined first, and its fundamental theses identified. The second half of the paper looks at recent contemporary variants.





 
Banks, Erik C. (online). Russell's Hypothesis and the New Physicalism. Proceedings of the Ohio Phil. Association 2009.   (Google)
Abstract: A 2009 conference paper about Russell's enhanced physicalism: physical structural relations of matter instantiated by qualities with "intrinsic character." Russell's hypothesis leads many to panpsychism or protophenomenalism via a line-of-descent argument, but there is a way to break the line of descent, making sensation qualities separate higher order structural dispositions, if they are instantiated by the right kind of ground-level dispositional qualities.
 
Blackburn, Simon W. (1990). Filling in space. Analysis 50 (2):62-5.   (Cited by 30 | Annotation | Google)




  
Chalmers, David J. (1996). The metaphysics of information. In The Conscious Mind.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Demopolous, W. & Friedman, Michael (1989). The concept of structure in Russell's The Analysis of Matter. In C. Wade Savage & C. Anthony Anderson (eds.), Rereading Russell: Essays in Bertrand Russell's Metaphysics and Epistemology. University of Minnesota Press.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Feigl, Herbert (1975). Russell and Schlick: A remarkable agreement on a monistic solution of the mind-body problem. Erkenntnis 9 (May):11-34.   (Cited by 5 | Annotation | Google)




  
Feigl, Herbert (1971). Some crucial issues of mind-body monism. Synthese 22 (May):295-312.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links) 




 
Feigl, Herbert (1958). The 'mental' and the 'physical'. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science 2:370-497.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google)




  
Feigl, Herbert (1960). The mind-body problem: Not a pseudo-problem. In Sidney Hook (ed.), Dimensions of Mind. New York University Press.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Feser, Edward (1998). Can phenomenal qualities exist unperceived? Journal of Consciousness Studies 4 (4):405-14.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Foster, John A. (1991). Lockwood's hypothesis. In John A. Foster (ed.), The Immaterial Self: A Defence of the Cartesian Dualist Conception of Mind. Routledge.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Freeman, Anthony (2006). Special issue on realistic monism - editorial introduction. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11):1-2.   (Google) 
 
Hohwy, Jakob (2005). Explanation and two conceptions of the physical. Erkenntnis 62 (1):71-89.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Any position that promises genuine progress on the mind-body problem deserves attention. Recently, Daniel Stoljar has identified a physicalist version of Russells notion of neutral monism; he elegantly argues that with this type of physicalism it is possible to disambiguate on the notion of physicalism in such a way that the problem is resolved. The further issue then arises of whether we have reason to believe that this type of physicalism is in fact true. Ultimately, one needs to argue for this position by inference to the best explanation, and I show that this new type of physicalism does not hold promise of more explanatory prowess than its relevant rivals, and that, whether it is better than its rivals or not, it is doubtful whether it would furnish us with genuine explanations of the phenomenal at all








 
Holman, Emmett L. (1986). Maxwell and materialism. Synthese 66 (March):505-14.   (Google | More links) 




 
Jones, Mostyn W. (forthcoming). How to make mind-brain relations clear. Journal of Consciousness Studies.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The mind-body problem arises because all theories about mind-brain connections are too deeply obscure to gain general acceptance. This essay suggests a clear, simple, mind-brain solution that avoids all these perennial obscurities. (1) It does so, first of all, by reworking Strawson and Stoljar’s views. They argue that while minds differ from observable brains, minds can still be what brains are physically like behind the appearances created by our outer senses. This could avoid many obscurities. But to clearly do so, it must first clear up its own deep obscurity about what brains are like behind appearances, and how they create the mind’s privacy, unity and qualia – all of which observable brains lack. (2) This can ultimately be done with a clear, simple assumption: our consciousness is the physical substance that certain brain events consist of beyond appearances. For example, the distinctive electrochemistry in nociceptor ion channels wholly consists of pain. This rejects that pain is a brain property: instead it’s a brain substance that occupies space in brains, and exerts forces by which it’s indirectly detectable via EEGs. (3) This assumption is justified because treating pains as physical substances avoids the perennial obscurities in mind-body theories. For example, this ‘clear physicalism’ avoids the obscure nonphysical pain of dualism and its spinoffs. Pain is instead an electrochemical substance. It isn’t private because it’s hidden in nonphysical minds, but instead because it’s just indirectly detected in the physical world in ways that leave its real nature hidden. (4) Clear physicalism also avoids puzzling reductions of private pains into more fundamental terms of observable brain activity. Instead pain is a hidden, private substance underlying this observable activity. Also, pain is fundamental in itself, for it’s what some brain activity fundamentally consists of. This also avoids reductive idealist claims that the world just exists in the mind. They yield obscure views on why we see a world that isn’t really out there. (5) Clear physicalism also avoids obscure claims that pain is information processing which is realizable in multiple hardwares (not just in electrochemistry). Molecular neuroscience now casts doubt on multiple realization. Also, it’s puzzling how abstract information gets ‘realized’ in brains and affects brains (compare ancient quandries on how universals get embodied in matter). A related idea is that of supervenient properties in nonreductive physicalism. They involve obscure overdetermination and emergent consciousness. Clear physicalism avoids all this. Pain isn’t an abstract property obscurely related to brains – it’s simply a substance in brains. (6) Clear physicalism also avoids problems in neuroscience. Neuroscience explains the mind’s unity in problematic ways using synchrony, attention, etc.. Clear physicalism explains unity in terms of intense neuroelectrical activity reaching continually along brain circuits as a conscious whole. This fits evidence that just highly active, highly connected circuits are fully conscious. Neuroscience also has problems explaining how qualia are actually encoded by brains, and how to get from these abstract codes to actual pain, fear, etc.. Clear physicalism explains qualia electrochemically, using growing evidence that both sensory and emotional qualia correlate with very specific electrical channels in neural receptors. Multiple-realization advocates overlook this important evidence. (7) Clear physicalism thus bridges the mind-brain gulf by showing how brains can possess the mind’s qualia, unity and privacy – and how minds can possess features of brain activity like occupying space and exerting forces. This unorthodox nonreductive physicalism may be where physicalism leads to when stripped of all its reductive and nonreductive obscurities. It offers a clear, simple mind-body solution by just filling in what neuroscience is silent about, namely, what brain matter is like behind perceptions of it.





 
Kriegel, Uriah (2008). Review of D. Stoljar, Ignorance and Imagination. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 86:515-519.   (Google) 
 
Lockwood, Michael (1989). Mind, Brain, and the Quantum. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 115 | Annotation | Google)




  
Lockwood, Michael (1993). The grain problem. In Howard M. Robinson (ed.), Objections to Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 19 | Annotation | Google)




  
Lockwood, Michael (1998). Unsensed phenomenal qualities: A defence. Journal of Consciousness Studies 4 (4):415-18.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Maxwell, Grover (1979). Rigid designators and mind-brain identity. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science 9.   (Cited by 20 | Annotation | Google)




  
Maxwell, Grover (1971). Structural realism and the meaning of theoretical terms. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science 4:181-192.   (Cited by 54 | Google) 
 
Maxwell, Grover (1978). Unity of consciousness and mind-brain identity. In John C. Eccles (ed.), Mind and Brain. Paragon House.   (Google) 
 
Newman, M. H. A. (1928). Mr. Russell's causal theory of perception. Mind 5 (146):26-43.   (Cited by 39 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 






 
Robinson, Howard M. (1982). Matter: Turning the tables. In Howard M. Robinson (ed.), Matter and Sense: A Critique of Contemporary Materialism. Cambridge University Press.   (Google) 
 
Rosenberg, Gregg H. (2004). A Place for Consciousness: Probing the Deep Structure of the Natural World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 43 | Google | More links)
Abstract: What place does consciousness have in the natural world? If we reject materialism, could there be a credible alternative? In one classic example, philosophers ask whether we can ever know what is it is like for bats to sense the world using sonar. It seems obvious to many that any amount of information about a bat's physical structure and information processing leaves us guessing about the central questions concerning the character of its experience. A Place for Consciousness begins with reflections on the existence of this gap. Is it just a psychological shortcoming in our merely human understanding of the physical world? Is it a trivial consequence of the simple fact that we just cannot be bats? Or does it mean there really are facts about consciousness over and above the physical facts? If so, what does consciousness do? Why does it exist? Rosenberg sorts out these problems, especially those centering on the causal role of consciousness. He introduces a new paradigm called Liberal Naturalism for thinking about what causation is, about the natural world, and about how to create a detailed model to go along with the new paradigm. Arguing that experience is part of the categorical foundations of causality, he shows that within this new paradigm there is a place for something essentially like consciousness in all its traditional mysterious respects. A striking feature of Liberal Naturalism is that its central tenets are motivated independently of the mind-body problem, by analyzing causation itself. Because of this approach, when consciousness shows up in the picture it is not introduced in an ad hoc way, and its most puzzling features can be explained from first principles. Ultimately, Rosenberg's final solution gives consciousness a causally important role without supposing either that it is physical or that it interacts with the physical





 
Rosenberg, Gregg H. (1999). On the Intrinsic Nature of the Physical. In Stuart R. Hameroff, Alfred W. Kaszniak & A. C. Scott (eds.), Toward a Science of Consciousness III. MIT Press.   (Google)
Abstract: In its original context Hawking was writing about the significance of physics for questions about God's existence and responsibility for creation. I am co-opting the sentiment for another purpose, though. As stated Hawking could equally be directing the question at concerns about the seemingly abstract information physics conveys about the world, and the full body of facts contained in the substance of the world. Would even a complete and adequate physics tell us all the general facts about the stuff the world is made of? In this chapter I am going to argue that the answer is "no." I am also going to argue that the missing facts are like the kinds of facts we can use to cross the explanatory gap. I am going to argue, in short, that we have reasons to re-enchant matter that are independent of the mind-body problem. In a recent anthology on consciousness (1997) G
 
Russell, Bertrand (1927). The Analysis of Matter. London: Kegan Paul.   (Cited by 138 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: "The Analysis of Matter" is one of the earliest and best philosophical studies of the new physics of relativity and quantum mechanics.





 
Schlick, M. (1925). General Theory of Knowledge. La Salle: Open Court.   (Cited by 28 | Google)
Abstract: The book expounds most of the doctrines that would later be identified with the classical period of the Vienna Circle.
 
Stoljar, Daniel (2006). Comments on Galen Strawson - 'realistic monism: Why physicalism entails panpsychism. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11):170-176.   (Google | More links) 




 
Stoljar, Daniel (forthcoming). Strawson's realistic monism. Journal of Consciousness Studies.   (Google)
Abstract: There is at least one element in Strawson
 
Stoljar, Daniel (2001). Two conceptions of the physical. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 62 (2):253-81.   (Cited by 30 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The debate over physicalism in philosophy of mind can be seen as concerning an inconsistent tetrad of theses: (1) if physicalism is true, a priori physicalism is true; (2) a priori physicalism is false; (3) if physicalism is false, epiphenomenalism is true; (4) epiphenomenalism is false. This paper argues that one may resolve the debate by distinguishing two conceptions of the physical: on the theory-based conception








 
Strawson, Galen (2003). Realistic materialism. In Louise M. Antony & Norbert Hornstein (eds.), Chomsky and His Critics. Blackwell.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Strawson, Galen (2003). Real materialism. In Louise M. Antony (ed.), Chomsky and His Critics. Blackwell Publishing.   (Cited by 19 | Google) 
 
Stubenberg, Leopold (1997). Austria vs. australia: Two versions of the identity theory. In Keith Lehrer & Johann Christian Marek (eds.), Austrian Philosophy, Past and Present. Kluwer.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Stubenberg, Leopold (1998). Consciousness and Qualia. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 73 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Consciousness and Qualia is a philosophical study of qualitative consciousness, characteristic examples of which are pains, experienced colors, sounds, etc.







 
Stubenberg, Leopold (1996). The place of qualia in the world of science. In Stuart R. Hameroff, Alfred W. Kaszniak & A. C. Scott (eds.), Toward a Science of Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Cited by 7 | Google) 
 
Unger, Peter K. (1998). The mystery of the physical and the matter of qualities. Midwest Studies in Philosophy 22 (1):75–99.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links)
Abstract: For some fifty years now, nearly all work in mainstream analytic philosophy has made no serious attempt to understand the _nature of_ _physical reality,_ even though most analytic philosophers take this to be all of reality, or nearly all. While we've worried much about the nature of our own experiences and thoughts and languages, we've worried little about the nature of the vast physical world that, as we ourselves believe, has them all as only a small part







 
1.4i Neutral Monism




Ahmed, Mafizuddin (1989). Bertrand Russell's Neutral Monism. Mittal Publications.   (Google) 
 
Banks, Erik C. (2003). Ernst Mach's World Elements. Kluwer.   (Google)
Abstract: A consideration of Mach's elements, his philosophy of neutral monism, and philosophy of physics, especially space and time, much of it based on unpublished writings from the Nachlass and other original sources. The historical connection between Mach and logical positivism is shown to be superficial at best, and Mach's elements are shown to be mind independent natural qualities (world-elements) with dynamic force, not limited to human sensations.
 
Banks, Erik C. (2010). Neutral Monism Reconsidered. Philosophical Psychology 23 (2):173-187.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Should neutral monism be reconsidered? Classic NM (Mach James Russell) is examined first, and its fundamental theses identified. The second half of the paper looks at recent contemporary variants.





 
Banks, Erik C. (online). Russell's Hypothesis and the New Physicalism. Proceedings of the Ohio Phil. Association 2009.   (Google)
Abstract: A 2009 conference paper about Russell's enhanced physicalism: physical structural relations of matter instantiated by qualities with "intrinsic character." Russell's hypothesis leads many to panpsychism or protophenomenalism via a line-of-descent argument, but there is a way to break the line of descent, making sensation qualities separate higher order structural dispositions, if they are instantiated by the right kind of ground-level dispositional qualities.
 
Bhattacharya, Manjulekha (1972). Ernst Mach: Neutral monism. Studi Internazionali Di Filosofia 4:145-182.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Bode, Boyd H. (1905). 'Pure experience' and the external world. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 2 (5):128-133.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Bode, Boyd H. (1905). The concept of pure experience. Philosophical Review 14 (6):684-695.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Bradley McGilvary, Evander (1911). Experience as pure and consciousness as meaning. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 8 (19):511-525.   (Google | More links) 




 
Bradley McGilvary, Evander (1907). Pure experience and reality: A reassertion. Philosophical Review 16 (4):422-424.   (Google | More links) 




 
Cooper, W. E. (1990). William James's theory of mind. Journal of the History of Philosophy (October) 571 (October):571-593.   (Google) 
 
Drabinski, John E. (1993). Radical empiricism and phenomenology: Philosophy and the pure stuff of experience. Journal of Speculative Philosophy 7 (3):226-242.   (Google) 
 
Hamilton, Andy (1990). Ernst Mach and the elimination of subjectivity. Ratio 3 (2):117-135.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Holman, Emmett (2008). Panpsychism, physicalism, neutral monism and the Russellian theory of mind. Journal of Consciousness Studies 15 (5):48-67.   (Google)
Abstract: As some see it, an impasse has been reached on the mind- body problem between mainstream physicalism and mainstream dualism. So lately another view has been gaining popularity, a view that might be called the 'Russellian theory of mind' (RTM) since it is inspired by some ideas once put forth by Bertrand Russell. Most versions of RTM are panpsychist, but there is at least one version that rejects panpsychism and styles itself as physicalism, and neutral monism is also a possibility. In this paper I will attempt to sort out these different versions with a view to determining which, if any, have a chance of breaking the perceived impasse. The unsurprising conclusion will be that there are a lot of challenges ahead for the RTM theorist. The surprising conclusion will be that it's not clear that pan- psychist RTM holds an advantage over the other versions in this regard
 
James, William (1904). A world of pure experience. Journal of Philosophy Psychology and Scientific Methods 1 (21):533-543.   (Cited by 36 | Google | More links) 







 
James, William (1904). A world of pure experience. II. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 1 (21):561-570.   (Google | More links) 







 
James, William & Perry, Ralph Barton (eds.) (1996). Essays in Radical Empiricism. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.   (Cited by 158 | Google | More links)
Abstract: William James believed that events could not be catalogued simply as a series of facts, but had to be considered through the lens of experience.







 
James, William (1905). How two minds can know one thing. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 2 (7):176-181.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 





 
Lockwood, Michael (1981). What was Russell's neutral monism? Midwest Studes in Philosophy 6:143-58.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Lowe, Victor (1942). William James' Pluralistic Metaphysics of Experience. In Victor Lowe (ed.), In Commemoration Of William James: 1842-1942. Columbia University Press.   (Google) 
 
Moller, Mark S. (2001). James, perception and the Miller-Bode objections. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society 37 (4):609-626.   (Google) 
 
Persson, Ingmar (2006). Consciousness as existence as a form of neutral monism. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (s 7-8):128-146.   (Google)
Abstract: I shall here raise and attempt to answer -- given the constraints of space, rather dogmatically -- some fundamental questions as regards the fertile and far-reaching doctrine Ted Honderich has in the past called Consciousness as Existence
 
Persson, Ingmar (1985). The Primacy of Perception: Towards a Neutral Monism. C.W.K. Gleerup.   (Google) 
 
Seigfried, Charlene H. (1992). William James's concrete analysis of experience. The Monist 75 (4):538-550.   (Google) 
 
Sellars, Roy Wood (1907). The nature of experience. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 4 (1):14-18.   (Google | More links) 





 
Stubenberg, Leopold (online). Neutral monism. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 




 
Taylor, Eugene & Wozniak, Robert H. (1996). Pure experience: The response to William James. In E.I. Taylor & R.H. Wozniak (eds.), Pure Experience: The Response to William James. Bristol: Thoemmes Press.   (Cited by 11 | Google)
Abstract: The radical empiricism of William James was first formally presented in his seminal papers of 1904, 'Does Consciousness Exist?' and 'A World of Pure Experience'. In James's view, pure experience was to serve as the source for psychology's primary data and radical empiricism was to launch an effective critique of experimentalism in psychology, a critique from which the problem of experimentalism within science could be addressed more broadly. This collection of papers presents James's formal statements on radical empiricism and a representative sample of contemporary responses from psychologists and philosophers. With only a few exceptions, these responses indicate just how badly James was misread - psychologists ignoring the heart of James's message and philosophers transforming James's metaphysics into something quite unintelligible to the emerging generation of experimental psychologists
 
Tully, Robert (1988). Russell's neutral monism. Russell 8:209-224.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Tully, R. E. (1993). Three studies of Russell's neutral monism. Russell 13 (1):5-35.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Velmans, Prof Max (2007). Reflexive monism. [Journal (Paginated)] (in Press) 15 (2):5-50.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Reflexive monism is, in essence, an ancient view of how consciousness relates to the material world that has, in recent decades, been resurrected in modern form. In this paper I discuss how some of its basic features differ from both dualism and variants of physicalist and functionalist reductionism, focusing on those aspects of the theory that challenge deeply rooted presuppositions in current Western thought. I pay particular attention to the ontological status and seeming “out-thereness” of the phenomenal world and to how the “phenomenal world” relates to the “physical world”, the “world itself”, and processing in the brain. In order to place the theory within the context of current thought and debate, I address questions that have been raised about reflexive monism in recent commentaries and also evaluate competing accounts of the same issues offered by “transparency theory” and by “biological naturalism”. I argue that, of the competing views on offer, reflexive monism most closely follows the contours of ordinary experience, the findings of science, and common sense







 
Wood, Joanne A. (1994). Lighthouse bodies: The neutral monism of Virginia Woolf and Bertrand Russell. Journal of the History of Ideas 55 (3):483-502.   (Google | More links) 




 
1.4k Specific Views on Consciousness, Misc




Garvey, James (2006). Consciousness and absence. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (s 7-8):44-60.   (Google) 
 
Haraldsen, Robert E. (online). Mind, Matter and Extreme Relativistic Aberration -ERA. Mind and Matter - a scientific approach.   (Google)
Abstract: On consciousness and the flow of spacetime with emphasis on Relativity, Quantum Mechanics and extra dimensions from the perspective of extreme relativistic aberration - ERA From the deepest levels of eternal consciousness we are shaped into an illusive subjective world of inherited collective projections built on phenomenological interactions, obeying solely the realm of purely abstract mathematics.
 
Haraldsen, Robert E. (ms). The Flow of the Oscillating Universe.   (Google)
Abstract: A deeper understanding of the dynamics of consciousness, not only in the trivial sense of immaterial psychological relations, but as the prerequisite of the universe itself, may lead to an understanding of gravitation. The following argument acknowledges theories of higher dimensions, such as string-M-theory as important descriptive models along with the embedded theories of quantum mechanics and an expanded relativity theory. It is also presumed that the unexploited consequence of special relativity; extreme relativistic aberration , will turn out to be one of the most important keys to a better understanding of the overall unity.
 
1.5 Consciousness and Content




Crawford, Sean (ed.) (2010). Philosophy of Mind: Critical Concepts in Philosophy. Routledge.   (Google)
Abstract: v. 1. Foundations -- v. 2. The mind-body problem -- v. 3. Intentionality -- v. 4. Consciousness.
 
Mandik, Pete (forthcoming). Control consciousness. Topics in Cognitive Science.   (Google)
Abstract: Control consciousness is the awareness or experience of seeming to be in control of one’s actions. One view, which I will be arguing against in the present paper, is that control consciousness is a form of sensory consciousness. On such a view, control consciousness is exhausted by sensory elements such as tactile and proprioceptive information. An opposing view, which I will be arguing for, is that sensory elements cannot be the whole story and must be supplemented by direct contributions of nonsensory, motor elements. More specifically, I will be arguing for the view that the neural basis of control consciousness is constituted by states of recurrent activation in relatively intermediate levels of the motor hierarchy.
 
Skokowski, Paul (2003). The right kind of content for a physicalist about color. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 26 (6):790-790.   (Google)
Abstract: Color experiences have representational content. But this content need not include a propositional component, particularly for reflectance physicalists such as Byrne & Hilbert (B&H). Insisting on such content gives primacy to language where it is not required, and makes the extension of the argument to nonhuman animals suspect
 
1.5a Consciousness and Intentionality




Albertazzi, Liliana (2007). At the roots of consciousness: Intentional presentations. Journal of Consciousness Studies 14 (1):94-114.   (Google)
Abstract: The Author argues for a non-semantic theory of intentionality, i.e. a theory of intentional reference rooted in the perceptive world. Specifically, the paper concerns two aspects of the original theory of intentionality: the structure of intentional objects as appearance (an unfolding spatio-temporal structure endowed with a direction), and the cognitive processes involved in a psychic act at the primary level of cognition. Examples are given from the experimental psychology of vision, with a particular emphasis on the relation between phenomenal space and colour appearances
 
Baker, Lynne Rudder (2002). Conscious and unconscious intentionality in practical realism. MeQRiMa Rivista Di Analisi Testo Letterario E Figurativo 5:130-135.   (Google)
Abstract: 1. Suppose that John and Jane are junior colleagues in an academic department of a university. John, who thinks of Jane as his competitor, has seen her flirt with the head of the department. He tells his other colleagues that Jane is trying to gain an unfair advantage over him. He comes to dislike Jane, and often in conversation with people outside the department, he enjoys saying bad things about Jane
 
Barresi, John (2007). Consciousness and intentionality. Journal of Consciousness Studies 14 (1-2):77-93.   (Cited by 2 | Google)
Abstract: My goal is to try to understand the intentionality of consciousness from a naturalistic perspective. My basic methodological assumption is that embodied agents, through their sensory-motor, affective, and cognitive activities directed at objects, engage in intentional relations with these objects. Furthermore, I assume that intentional relations can be viewed from a first- and a third-person perspective. What is called primary consciousness is the first-person perspective of the agent engaged in a current intentional relation. While primary consciousness posits an implicit
 
Bortolotti, L. (2002). Consciousness and intentionality: Models and modalities of attribution. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 80 (2):247 – 248.   (Google)
Abstract: Book Information Consciousness and Intentionality: Models and Modalities of Attribution. Edited by Fisette Denis. Kluwer Academic Publishers. Dordrecht. 1999. Pp. viii + 361. Hardback, US$140, £88
 
Bourget, David (2010). Consciousness is underived intentionality. Noûs 44 (1):32-58.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Representationalists argue that phenomenal states are intentional states of a special kind. This paper offers an account of the kind of intentional state phenomenal states are: I argue that they are underived intentional states. This account of phenomenal states is equivalent to two theses: first, all possible phenomenal states are underived intentional states; second, all possible underived intentional states are phenomenal states. I clarify these claims and argue for each of them. I also address objections which touch on a range of topics, including meaning holism and concept empiricism. I conclude with a brief discussion of the consequences of the proposed view for the project of naturalizing consciousness. 





 
Bourget, David (2010). The representational theory of consciousness. Dissertation, Australian National University   (Google)
Abstract: A satisfactory solution to the problem of consciousness would take the form of a simple yet fully general model which specifies the precise conditions under which any given state of consciousness occurs. Science has uncovered numerous correlations between consciousness and neural activity, but it has not yet come anywhere close to this. We are still looking for the Newtonian laws of consciousness. One of the main difficulties with consciousness is that we lack a language in which to formulate illuminating generalizations about it. Philosophers and scientists talk about "what it’s like", sensations, feelings, and perceptual states such as seeing and hearing. This language does not allow a precise articulation of the internal structures of conscious states and their inter-relations. It is inadequate to capture relations of the kind we are looking for between conscious states and physical states. In this thesis I refine and defend a theory of consciousness which promises to solve this regimentation problem: the representational theory of consciousness. I argue that the representational theory can solve the regimentation problem and smooth out other important obstacles to a fruitful study of consciousness. I also make a case for the theory independently of its payoffs, and I discuss the leading opposing theories at some length. In the rest of this introduction, I will clarify what I mean by "consciousness", provide an initial characterization of the representational theory, and outline my project in more detail
 
Brown, Richard (2007). The mark of the mental. Southwest Philosophy Review 23 (1):117-124.   (Google)
Abstract: In the Standard Model of the Mind currently employed in cognitive science we have corresponding to thought and sense two distinct kinds of properties: intentional and qualitative. On the one hand we have qualitative states, which are generally agreed to be those states which there is ‘something that it is like’ for the subject that has them; I will say that these states have a quality. On the other hand we have intentional states, which have the property of being about something, called intentionality, and which lack a quality. There is nothing that it is like to have intentional states. According to the Standard Model all mental phenomena have one or another, or both, of these properties. There are some mental phenomena that are purely qualitative (perhaps sensations and their sensory qualities) and some that are purely intentional (thoughts) and still others that are a mix of both (perceptions and emotions). Of course, there are those who resist the Standard Model, drawn as they are to the siren song of a single mark of the mental
 
Copenhaver, Rebecca (2006). Thomas Reid's philosophy of mind: Consciousness and intentionality. Philosophy Compass 1 (3):279-289.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 






 
Crane, Tim (1998). Intentionality as the mark of the mental. In Tim Crane (ed.), Contemporary Issues in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 20 | Google | More links)
Abstract: ‘It is of the very nature of consciousness to be intentional’ said Jean-Paul Sartre, ‘and a consciousness that ceases to be a consciousness of something would ipso facto cease to exist’.1 Sartre here endorses the central doctrine of Husserl’s phenomenology, itself inspired by a famous idea of Brentano’s: that intentionality, the mind’s ‘direction upon its objects’, is what is distinctive of mental phenomena. Brentano’s originality does not lie in pointing out the existence of intentionality, or in inventing the terminology, which derives from scholastic discussions of concepts or intentiones.2 Rather, his originality consists in his claim that the concept of intentionality marks out the subject matter of psychology: the mental. His view was that intentionality ‘is characteristic exclusively of mental phenomena. No physical phenomenon manifests anything like it’.3 This is Brentano’s thesis that intentionality is the mark of the mental. Despite the centrality of the concept of intentionality in contemporary philosophy of mind, and despite the customary homage paid to Brentano as the one who revived the terminology and placed the concept at the centre of philosophy, Brentano’s thesis is widely rejected by contemporary philosophers of mind. What is more, its rejection is not something which is thought to require substantial philosophical argument. Rather, the falsity of the thesis is taken as a starting-point in many contemporary discussions of intentionality, something so obvious that it only needs to be stated to be recognised as true. Consider, for instance, these remarks from the opening pages of Searle’s Intentionality: Some, not all, mental states and events have Intentionality. Beliefs, fears, hopes and desires are Intentional; but there are forms of nervousness, elation and undirected anxiety that are not Intentional.... My beliefs and desires must always be about something. But my nervousness and undirected anxiety need not in that way be about anything.4 Searle takes this as obvious, so obvious that it is not in need of further argument or elucidation..






 
Davies, Martin (1995). Consciousness and the varieties of aboutness. In C. Macdonald (ed.), Philosophy of Psychology: Debates on Psychological Explanation. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 9 | Google)
Abstract: Thinking is special. There is nothing quite like it. Thinking
 
Fodor, Jerry A. & Lepore, Ernest (1994). What is the connection principle? Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 54 (4):837-45.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: The Connection Principle (hereafter, CP) says that there is some kind of internal relation between a state's1 having intentional content ("aspectual shape") and its being (at least potentially) conscious. Searle's argument for the principle is just that potential consciousness is the only thing he can think of that would distinguish original intentionality from ersatz (Searle, 1992, pp. 84, 155 and passim. All Searle references are to 1992). Cognitivists have generally found this argument underwhelming given the empirical successes recently enjoyed by linguistic and psychological theories with which, according to Searle, CP is not reconcilable. Our primary interest in this paper is not, however, to decide whether CP is true, but just to get as clear as we can about what exactly it asserts. Finding a reasonable formulation of the principle turns out to be harder than Searle appears to suppose; or so we claim







 
Freeman, Walter J. (1997). Three centuries of category errors in studies of the neural basis of consciousness and intentionality. Neural Networks 10:1175-83.   (Cited by 15 | Google | More links) 








 
Gillett, Grant R. & McMillan, John (2001). Consciousness and Intentionality. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This book considers questions such as these and argues for a conception of consciousness, mental content and intentionality that is anti-Cartesian in its major...








 
Gonzalez-Castan, Oscar L. (1999). The connection principle and the classificatory scheme of reality. Teorema 18 (1):85-98.   (Google | More links) 




 
Graham, George; Horgan, Terence E. & Tienson, John L. (2007). Consciousness and intentionality. In Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Gunderson, Keith (1990). Consciousness and intentionality: Robots with and without the right stuff. In C. Anthony Anderson & Joseph Owens (eds.), Propositional Attitudes: The Role of Content in Language, Logic, and Mind. Csli.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Honderich, Ted (2001). Consciousness as existence and the end of intentionality. In Anthony O'Hear (ed.), Philosophy at the New Millennium. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 




 
Hulse, Donovan & Read, Cynthia (online). Searle's intentional mistake.   (Google) 
 
Jacob, Pierre (1995). Consciousness, intentionality, and function: What is the right order of explanation? Philosophy And Phenomenological Research 55 (1):195-200.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 











 
Kriegel, Uriah (2007). Intentional inexistence and phenomenal intentionality. Philosophical Perspectives 21 (1):307-340.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: How come we can represent Bigfoot even though Bigfoot does not exist, given that representing something involves bearing a relation to it and we cannot bear relations to what does not exist?This is the problem of intentional inexistence. This paper develops a two-step solution to this problem, involving (first) an adverbial account of conscious representation, or phenomenal inten- tionality, and (second) the thesis that all representation derives from conscious representation (all intentionality derives from phenomenal intentionality). The solution is correspondingly two-part: we can consciously represent Bigfoot because consciously representing Bigfoot does not involve bearing a relation to Bigfoot, but rather instantiating a certain non-relational (“adverbial”) property of representing Bigfoot-wise; and we can non-consciously represent Bigfoot because non-consciously representing Bigfoot does not involve bearing a relation to Bigfoot, but rather bearing a relation to conscious representations of Bigfoot





 
Kriegel, Uriah (2003). Is intentionality dependent upon consciousness? Philosophical Studies 116 (3):271-307.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links)
Abstract: It is often assumed thatconsciousness and intentionality are twomutually independent aspects of mental life.When the assumption is denounced, it usuallygives way to the claim that consciousness issomehow dependent upon intentionality. Thepossibility that intentionality may bedependent upon consciousness is rarelyentertained. Recently, however, John Searle andColin McGinn have argued for just suchdependence. In this paper, I reconstruct andevaluate their argumentation. I am in sympathyboth with their view and with the lines ofargument they employ in its defense. UnlikeSearle and McGinn, however, I am quite attachedto a naturalist approach to intentionality. Itwill turn out to be somewhat difficult toreconcile naturalism with the notion thatintentionality is dependent upon consciousness,although, perhaps surprisingly, I will arguethat McGinn's case for such dependence iscompatible with naturalism










 
Lehrer, Keith (1986). Metamind: Belief, consciousness and intentionality. In R. Bogdan (ed.), Belief: Form, Content, and Function. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 14 | Google) 
 
Leon, Mark . (1987). Character, content, and the ontology of experience. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 65 (December):377-399.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 







 
Levine, Joseph (2008). Secondary Qualities: Where Consciousness and Intentionality Meet. Monist 91 (2).   (Google) 
 
Ludwig, Kirk A. (1993). A dilemma for Searle's argument for the connection principle. Behavioral And Brain Sciences 16:194-5.   (Google)
Abstract: Objections to Searle's argument for the Connection Principle and its consequences (Searle 1990a) fall roughly into three categories: (1) those that focus on problems with the _argument_ for the Connection Principle; (2) those that focus on problems in understanding the _conclusion_ of this argument; (3) those that focus on whether the conclusion has the _consequences_ Searle claims for it. I think the Connection Principle is both true and important, but I do not think that Searle's argument establishes it. The problem with the argument is that it either begs the question or proves too much
 
Ludwig, Kirk A. (2002). Phenomenal consciousness and intentionality: Comments on The Significance of Consciousness. Psyche 8 (8).   (Cited by 2 | Google)
Abstract: _The Significance of Consciousness_ . Princeton: Princeton University Press. $42.50 hbk. x + 374pp. ISBN: 0691027242.  ABSTRACT: I discuss three issues about the relation of phenomenal consciousness, in the sense Siewert isolates, to
 
Macpherson, Fiona (2006). Ambiguous figures and the content of experience. Noûs 40 (1):82-117.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Representationalism is the position that the phenomenal character of an experience is either identical with, or supervenes on, the content of that experience. Many representationalists hold that the relevant content of experience is nonconceptual. I propose a counter-example to this form of representationalism that arises from the phenomenon of Gestalt switching, which occurs when viewing ambiguous figures. First, I argue that one does not need to appeal to the conceptual content of experience or to judge- ments to account for Gestalt switching. I then argue that experiences of certain ambiguous figures are problematic because they have different phenomenal characters but that no difference in the nonconceptual content of these experiences can be identified. I consider three solutions to this problem that have been proposed by both philosophers and psychologists and conclude that none can account for all the ambiguous figures that pose the problem. I conclude that the onus is on representationalists to specify the relevant difference in content or to abandon their position







 
Macpherson, Fiona (2005). Colour inversion problems for representationalism. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 70 (1):127-152.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper I examine whether representationalism can account for various thought experiments about colour inversions. Representationalism is, at minimum, the view that, necessarily, if two experiences have the same representational content then they have the same phenomenal character. I argue that representationalism ought to be rejected if one holds externalist views about experiential content and one holds traditional exter- nalist views about the nature of the content of propositional attitudes. Thus, colour inver- sion scenarios are more damaging to externalist representationalist views than have been previously thought. More specifically, I argue that representationalists who endorse externalism about experiential content either have to become internalists about the content of propositional attitudes or they have to adopt a novel variety of externalism about the content of propositional attitudes. This novel type of propositional attitude externalism is investigated. It can be seen that adopting it forces one to reject Putnam








 
Macpherson, Fiona (2003). Novel colours and the content of experience. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 84 (1):43-66.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links)
Abstract: I propose a counterexample to naturalistic representational theories of phenomenal character. The counterexample is generated by experiences of novel colours reported by Crane and Piantanida. I consider various replies that a representationalist might make, including whether novel colours could be possible colours of objects and whether one can account for novel colours as one would account for binary colours or colour mixtures. I argue that none of these strategies is successful and therefore that one cannot fully explain the nature of the phenomenal character of perceptual experiences using a naturalistic conception of representation











 
Macpherson, Fiona (2000). Representational Theories of Phenomenal Character. Dissertation, University of Stirling   (Google | More links) 




 
Malmgren, Helge (1975). Internal relations in the analysis of consciousness. Theoria 41:61-83.   (Google) 
 
Marbach, Eduard (1993). Mental Representation and Consciousness: Toward a Phenomenological Theory of Representation and Reference. Kluwer.   (Cited by 22 | Google)
Abstract: The book makes a direct contribution to the connection between phenomenology and cognitive science.
 
Mascarenhas, Vijay (2002). Intentionality, causality, and self-consciousness: Implications for the naturalization of consciousness. Metaphysica 3 (2):83-96.   (Google) 
 
McCulloch, Gregory (1999). Bipartism and the phenomenology of content. Philosophical Quarterly 50 (194):18-32.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 









 
McGinn, Colin (2008). Consciousness as Knowingness. Monist 91 (2).   (Google)
Abstract: My thesis is: Consciousness is a being such that in its being the being of other being is known. To be conscious is to be in a state of knowingness. The essence of consciousness is knowledge.
 
Millar, Boyd (2010). Peacocke's trees. Synthese 174 (3).   (Google)
Abstract: In Sense and Content , Christopher Peacocke points out that two equally-sized trees at different distances from the perceiver are normally represented to be the same size, despite the fact that in a certain sense the nearer tree looks bigger ; he concludes on the basis of this observation that visual experiences possess irreducibly phenomenal properties. This argument has received the most attention of all of Peacocke’s arguments for separatism—the view that the intentional and phenomenal properties of experiences are independent of one another. However, despite its notoriety, the argument is widely misunderstood and underappreciated. I argue that once the structure of the argument is clarified and the replies that have been offered are considered closely, one must conclude that the trees argument is successful
 
Molyneux, Bernard (2009). Why experience told me nothing about transparency. Noûs 43 (1):116-136.   (Google)
Abstract: The transparency argument concludes that we're directly aware of external properties and not directly aware of the properties of experience. Focusing on the presentation used by Michael Tye (2002) I contend that the argument requires experience to have content that it cannot plausibly have. I attribute the failure to a faulty account of the transparency phenomenon and conclude by suggesting an alternative understanding that is independently plausible, is not an error-theory and yet renders the transparency of experience compatible with mental-paint style views
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1992). Intentionality, consciousness, and subjectivity. Journal of Mind and Behavior 13 (3):281-308.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Nelkin, Dana K. (2001). Phenomenal consciousness and intentionality. Psyche 7 (13).   (Google)
Abstract: Siewert identifies a special kind of conscious experience, phenomenal consciousness, that is the sort of consciousness missing in a variety of cases of blindsight. He then argues that phenomenal consciousness has been neglected by students of consciousness when it should not be. According to Siewert, the neglect is based at least in part on two false assumptions: (i) phenomenal features are not intentional and (ii) phenomenal character is restricted to sensory experience. By identifying an essential tension in Siewert's characterization of phenomenal consciousness, I argue that his case for denying (i) and (ii) is at best incomplete
 
Nelkin, Norton (1993). The connection between intentionality and consciousness. In Martin Davies & Glyn W. Humphreys (eds.), Consciousness: Psychological and Philosophical Essays. Blackwell.   (Cited by 10 | Annotation | Google)




  
Noë, Alva (2006). Experience without the head. In Tamar S. Gendler & John Hawthorne (eds.), Perceptual Experience. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Pasquerella, L. (2002). Phenomenology and intentional acts of sensing in Brentano. Southern Journal of Philosophy 40:269-279.   (Google) 
 
Pautz, Adam (ms). The intentional structure of consciousness: A primitivist theory.   (Google) 
 
Peacocke, Christopher (2001). Phenomenology and nonconceptual content. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 62 (3):609-615.   (Cited by 14 | Google | More links) 






 
Puskaric, Ksenija (2004). Crane on intentionality and consciousness: A few questions. Croatian Journal of Philosophy 4 (11):219-222.   (Google) 
 
Robinson, William S. (ms). Phenomenal consciousness and intentionality: Vive la difference!   (Google) 
 
Rorty, Richard (1994). Consciousness, intentionality, and the philosophy of mind. In Richard Warner & Tadeusz Szubka (eds.), The Mind-Body Problem: A Guide to the Current Debate. Cambridge: Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (1990). On being accessible to consciousness. Behavioral And Brain Sciences 13 (4):621-621.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Schweizer, Paul (1994). Intentionality, qualia, and mind/brain identity. Minds and Machines 4 (3):259-82.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 





 
Searle, John R. (1990). Consciousness, explanatory inversion and cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 13:585-642.   (Cited by 101 | Annotation | Google)




  
Seager, William E. (1999). Conscious intentionality and the anti-cartesian catastrophe. In William E. Seager (ed.), Theories of Consciousness: An Introduction and Assessment. Routledge.   (Google) 
 
Searle, John R. (1995). Consciousness, the brain and the connection principle: A reply. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 55 (1):217-232.   (Cited by 11 | Google | More links) 





 
Sen, Madhucchanda (2003). The mind-mind problem. In Amita Chatterjee (ed.), Perspectives on Consciousness. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.   (Google) 
 
Shani, Itay (2008). Against Consciousness Chauvinism. Monist 91 (2).   (Google) 
 
Siewert, Charles (online). Consciousness and Intentionality. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.   (Cited by 15 | Google | More links) 




 
Strawson, Galen (2005). Intentionality and experience: Terminological preliminaries. In David Woodruff Smith & Amie L. Thomasson (eds.), Phenomenology and Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Clarendon Press.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 




 
Strawson, Galen (2005). Real intentionality V.2: Why intentionality entails consciousness. Synthesis Philosophica 2 (40):279-297.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This version of this paper has been superseded by a substantially revised version in G. Strawson, Real Materialism and Other Essays (OUP 2008)





 
Sundstrom, Par (online). Consciousness and intentionality of action.   (Google) 
 
Sundström, Pär (2004). Lessons for Mary. In Marek and Reicher (ed.), Experience and Analysis: Papers of the 27th International Wittgenstein Symposium. The Austrian Ludwig Wittgenstein Society.   (Google) 
 
Tartaglia, James (2008). Intentionality, Consciousness, and the Mark of the Mental: Rorty’s Challenge. Monist 91 (2).   (Google) 
 
Thomas, Nigel J. T. (ms). Coding dualism: Conscious thought without cartesianism or computationalism.   (Google)
Abstract: The principal temptation toward substance dualisms, or otherwise incorporating a question begging homunculus into our psychologies, arises not from the problem of consciousness in general, nor from the problem of intentionality, but from the question of our awareness and understanding of our own mental contents, and the control of the deliberate, conscious thinking in which we employ them. Dennett has called this "Hume's problem". Cognitivist philosophers have generally either denied the experiential reality of thought, as did the Behaviorists, or have taken an implicitly epiphenomenalist stance, a form of dualism. Some sort of mental duality may indeed be required to meet this problem, but not one that is metaphysical or question begging. I argue that it can be solved in the light of Paivio's "Dual Coding" theory of mental representation. This theory, which is strikingly simple and intuitive (perhaps too much so to have caught the imagination of philosophers) has demonstrated impressive empirical power and scope. It posits two distinct systems of potentially conscious representations in the human mind: mental imagery and verbal representation (which is not to be confused with 'propositional' or "mentalese" representation). I defend, on conceptual grounds, Paivio's assertion of precisely two codes against interpretations which would either multiply image codes to match sense modes, or collapse the two, admittedly interacting, systems into one. On this basis I argue that the inference that a conscious agent would be needed to read such mental representations and to manipulate them in the light of their contents can be pre-empted by an account of how the two systems interact, each registering, affecting and being affected by developing associative processes within the other
 
Thomasson, Amie (2008). Phenomenal consciousness and the phenomenal world. Monist 91 (2).   (Google)
Abstract: One-level accounts of consciousness have become increasingly popular (Dretske 1995, Tye 1995, Siewert 1998, Thomasson 2000 and 2005, Lurz 2006, McGinn, this volume). By a ‘onelevel’ account I mean an account according to which consciousness is fundamentally a matter of awareness of a world —and does not require awareness of our own minds, mental states, or the phenomenal character of these. As Fred Dretske puts it “Experiences and beliefs are conscious, not because you are conscious of them, but because, so to speak, you are conscious with them”
 
Thomasson, Amie L. (2001). Two puzzles for a new theory of consciousness. Psyche 8 (3).   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: In _The Significance of Consciousness_ , Charles Siewert proposes a novel understanding of consciousness by arguing against higher-order views of consciousness and rejecting the traditional taxonomy of the mental into qualitative and intentional aspects. I discuss two puzzles that arise from these changes: first, how to account for first-person knowledge of our conscious states while denying that these are typically accompanied by higher-order states directed towards them; second, how to understand his claim that phenomenal features are intentional features without either risking consciousness neglect or retreating to a more traditional understanding of the relation between qualitative and intentional character
 
Vallicella, William (1991). Consciousness and intentionality: Illusions? Idealistic Studies 21 (1):79-89.   (Google) 
 
Van Baaren, Robbert (1999). A critical evaluation of Searle's connection principle. Teorema 18 (1):73-83.   (Google | More links) 




 
van Gulick, Robert (1988). Consciousness, intrinsic intentionality, and self-understanding machines. In Anthony J. Marcel & E. Bisiach (eds.), Consciousness in Contemporary Science. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 11 | Google) 
 
van Gulick, Robert (1995). How should we understand the relation between intentionality and phenomenal consciousness. Philosophical Perspectives 9:271-89.   (Google | More links) 




 
van Gulick, Robert (1995). Why the connection argument doesn't work. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 55 (1):201-7.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Williford, Kenneth (2005). The intentionality of consciousness and consciousness of intentionality. In G Forrai (ed.), Intentionality: Past and Future. Amsterdam/New York: Rodopi.   (Google)
Abstract: Some philosophers think that intentionality is ontologically distinct from phenomenal consciousness; call this the Thesis of Separation. Terence Horgan and John Tienson (2002, p. 520) call this
 
Zahavi, Dan (2005). Intentionality and experience. Synthesis Philosophica 2 (40):299-318.   (Google) 
 
Zahavi, Dan (2003). Intentionality and phenomenality: A phenomenological take on the hard problem. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 29:63-92.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
1.5b Representationalism




Adams, Frederick R. & Dietrich, Laura A. (2004). Swampman's revenge: Squabbles among the representationalists. Philosophical Psychology 17 (3):323-40.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: There are both externalist and internalist theories of the phenomenal content of conscious experiences. Externalists like Dretske and Tye treat the phenomenal content of conscious states as representations of external properties (and events). Internalists think that phenomenal conscious states are reducible to electrochemical states of the brain in the style of the type-type identity theory. In this paper, we side with the representationalists and visit a dispute between them over the test case of Swampman. Does Swampman have conscious phenomenal states or not? Dretske and Tye disagree on this issue. We try to settle the dispute in favor of Dretske's theory (to our own surprise)







 
Allen-Hermanson, Sean (2008). Insects and the problem of simple minds: Are bees natural zombies? Journal of Philosophy 105 (8).   (Google | More links) 




 
Alston, William P. (2005). Perception and representation. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 70 (2):253-289.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 






 
Alter, Torin (2006). Does representationalism undermine the knowledge argument? In Torin Alter & Sven Walter (eds.), Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 5 | Google)
Abstract: The knowledge argument aims to refute physicalism, the view that the world is entirely physical. The argument first establishes the existence of facts (or truths or information) about consciousness that are not a priori deducible from the complete physical truth, and then infers the falsity of physicalism from this lack of deducibility. Frank Jackson (1982, 1986) gave the argument its classic formulation. But now he rejects the argument (Jackson 1998b, 2003, chapter 3 of this volume). On his view, it relies on a false conception of sensory experience, which should be replaced with representationalism (also known as intentionalism), the view that phenomenal states are just representational states. And he argues that mental representation is physically explicable
 
Alter, Torin (2006). Does synesthesia undermine representationalism? Psyche 12 (5).   (Google)
Abstract: Does synesthesia undermine representationalism? Gregg Rosenberg (2004) argues that it does. On his view, synesthesia illustrates how phenomenal properties can vary independently of representational properties. So, for example, he argues that sound/color synesthetic experiences show that visual experiences do not always represent spatial properties. I will argue that the representationalist can plausibly answer Rosenberg
 
Arregui, Jorge V. (1996). On the intentionality of moods: Phenomenology and linguistic analysis. American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly 70 (3):397-411.   (Google) 
 
Aydede, Murat (2009). Is feeling pain the perception of something? Journal of Philosophy 106 (10).   (Google)
Abstract: According to the increasingly popular perceptual/representational accounts of pain (and other bodily sensations such as itches, tickles, orgasms, etc.), feeling pain in a body region is perceiving a non-mental property or some objective condition of that region, typically equated with some sort of (actual or potential) tissue damage. In what follows I argue that given a natural understanding of what sensory perception requires and how it is integrated with (dedicated) conceptual systems, these accounts are mistaken. I will also examine the relationship between perceptual views and two (weak and strong) forms of representationalism about experience. I will argue that pains pose very serious problems for strong representationalism as well
 
Aydede, Murat (2001). Naturalism, introspection, and direct realism about pain. Consciousness and Emotion 2 (1):29-73.   (Cited by 13 | Google)
Abstract: This paper examines pain states (and other intransitive bodily sensations) from the perspective of the problems they pose for pure informational/representational approaches to naturalizing qualia. I start with a comprehensive critical and quasi-historical discussion of so-called Perceptual Theories of Pain (e.g., Armstrong, Pitcher), as these were the natural predecessors of the more modern direct realist views. I describe the theoretical backdrop (indirect realism, sense-data theories) against which the perceptual theories were developed. The conclusion drawn is that pure representationalism about pain in the tradition of direct realist perceptual theories (e.g., Dretske, Tye) leaves out something crucial about the phenomenology of pain experiences, namely, their affective character. I touch upon the role that introspection plays in such representationalist views, and indicate how it contributes to the source of their trouble vis-à-vis bodily sensations. The paper ends by briefly commenting on the relation between the affective/evaluative component of pain and the hedonic valence of emotions
 
Bach, Kent (1997). Engineering the mind (review of Dretske 1995, Naturalizing the Mind). Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 57 (2):459-468.   (Google) 
 
Bach, Kent (ms). Engineering the mind.   (Google)
Abstract: No contemporary philosopher has tried harder to demystify the mind than Fred Dretske. But how to demystify it without eviscerating it? Can consciousness be explained? Many philosophers think that no matter how detailed and systematic our knowledge becomes of how the brain works and how it subserves mental functions, there will always remain an "explanatory gap." Call it a brute fact or call it a mystery, trying to explain consciousness, they think, is as futile as trying to explain why there is something rather than nothing. Dretske is not exercised by the explanatory gap-he'd rather exorcise it. He thinks we can get all the explanation we need by understanding what consciousness does. Consciousness is at bottom sensory experience and what it does, essentially, is to represent the world. Explaining consciousness, therefore, comes down to understanding the representational character of experience
 
Bain, David (2003). Intentionalism and pain. Philosophical Quarterly 53 (213):502-523.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The pain case can appear to undermine the radically intentionalist view that the phenomenal character of any experience is entirely constituted by its representational content. That appearance is illusory, I argue. After categorising versions of pain intentionalism along two dimensions, I argue that an “objectivist” and “non-mentalist” version is the most promising, provided it can withstand two objections: concerning what we say when in pain, and the distinctiveness of the pain case. I rebut these objections, in a way that’s available to both opponents and adherents of the view that experiential content is entirely conceptual. In doing so I illuminate peculiarities of somatosensory perception that should interest even those who take a different view of pain experiences







 
Bailey, Andrew R. (2007). Representation and a science of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 14 (1):62-76.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The first part of this paper defends a 'two-factor' approach to mental representation by moving through various choice-points that map out the main peaks in the landscape of philosophical debate about representation. The choice-points considered are: (1) whether representations are conceptual or non-conceptual; (2) given that mental representation is conceptual, whether conscious perceptual representations are analog or digital; (3) given that the content of a representation is the concept it expresses, whether that content is individuated extensionally or intensionally; (4) whether intensional contents are individuated by external or internal conditions; and (5) given that conceptual content is determined externally, whether the possession conditions for concepts are external or internal. The final part of the paper examines the relationship between representation and consciousness, arguing that any account of mental representation, though necessary for a complete account of consciousness, cannot be sufficient for it





 
Bailey, Andrew R. (2005). What is it like to see a bat? A critique of Dretske's representationalist theory of qualia. Disputatio 1 (18).   (Google) 
 
Beckermann, Ansgar (1995). Visual information processing and phenomenal consciousness. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Ferdinand Schoningh.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: As far as an adequate understanding of phenomenal consciousness is concerned, representationalist theories of mind which are modelled on the information processing paradigm, are, as much as corresponding neurobiological or functionalist theories, confronted with a series of arguments based on inverted or absent qualia considerations. These considerations display the following pattern: assuming we had complete knowledge about the neural and functional states which subserve the occurrence of phenomenal consciousness, would it not still be conceivable that these neural states (or states with the same causal r






 
Block, Ned (2005). Bodily sensations as an obstacle for representationism. In Murat Aydede (ed.), Pain: New Essays on Its Nature and the Methodology of Its Study. Cambridge MA: Bradford Book/MIT Press.   (Cited by 3 | Google)
Abstract: Representationism1, as I use the term, says that the phenomenal character of an experience just is its representational content, where that representational content can itself be understood and characterized without appeal to phenomenal character. Representationists seem to have a harder time handling pain than visual experience. (I say 'seem' because in my view, representationists cannot actually handle either type of experience successfully, but I will put that claim to one side here.) I will argue that Michael Tye's (2004) heroic attempt at a representationist theory of pain, although ingenious and enlightening, does not adequately come to terms with the root of this difference
 
Block, Ned (1990). Inverted earth. Philosophical Perspectives 4:53-79.   (Cited by 146 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Block, Ned (1998). Is experiencing just representing? Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 58 (3):663-670.   (Cited by 13 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The first problem concerns the famous Swampman who comes into existence as a result of a cosmic accident in which particles from the swamp come together, forming a molecular duplicate of a typical human. Reasonable people can disagree on whether Swampman has intentional contents. Suppose that Swampman marries Swampwoman and they have children. Reasonable people will be inclined to agree that there is something it is like for Swampchild when "words" go through his mind or come out of his mouth. Fred Dretske (1995) claims that if the materialist is to have any theory of intentional content at all, he has no option other than denying it. He is committed to the view that since phenomenal character is a kind of representational content that derives from evolution, the swampchildren have no phenomenal character. Zombiehood is hereditary. (So long as there is no evolution.) If your grandparents are all swamp-people, you are a zombie






 
Block, Ned (2003). Mental paint. In Martin Hahn & B. Ramberg (eds.), Reflections and Replies: Essays on the Philosophy of Tyler Burge. MIT Press.   (Cited by 23 | Google)
Abstract: The greatest chasm in the philosophy of mind--maybe even all of philosophy-- divides two perspectives on consciousness. The two perspectives differ on whether there is anything in the phenomenal character of conscious experience that goes beyond the intentional, the cognitive and the functional. A convenient terminological handle on the dispute is whether there are
 
Block, Ned (1996). Mental paint and mental latex. Philosophical Issues 7:19-49.   (Cited by 119 | Google | More links) 





 
Block, Ned (1999). Sexism, ageism, racism, and the nature of consciousness. Philosophical Topics 26 (1):39-70.   (Cited by 25 | Google)
Abstract: If a philosophical theory led to the conclusion that the red stripes cannot look red to both men and women, both blacks and whites, both young and old, we would be reluctant (to say the least) to accept that philosophical theory. But there is a widespread philosophical view about the nature of conscious experience that, together with some empirical facts, suggests that color experience cannot be veridical for both men and women, both blacks and whites, both young and old
 
Borst, Clive V. (1970). Perception and intentionality. Mind 79 (January):115-121.   (Google | More links) 





 
Bourget, David (2010). Consciousness is underived intentionality. Noûs 44 (1):32-58.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Representationalists argue that phenomenal states are intentional states of a special kind. This paper offers an account of the kind of intentional state phenomenal states are: I argue that they are underived intentional states. This account of phenomenal states is equivalent to two theses: first, all possible phenomenal states are underived intentional states; second, all possible underived intentional states are phenomenal states. I clarify these claims and argue for each of them. I also address objections which touch on a range of topics, including meaning holism and concept empiricism. I conclude with a brief discussion of the consequences of the proposed view for the project of naturalizing consciousness. 





 
Bourget, David (2010). The representational theory of consciousness. Dissertation, Australian National University   (Google)
Abstract: A satisfactory solution to the problem of consciousness would take the form of a simple yet fully general model which specifies the precise conditions under which any given state of consciousness occurs. Science has uncovered numerous correlations between consciousness and neural activity, but it has not yet come anywhere close to this. We are still looking for the Newtonian laws of consciousness. One of the main difficulties with consciousness is that we lack a language in which to formulate illuminating generalizations about it. Philosophers and scientists talk about "what it’s like", sensations, feelings, and perceptual states such as seeing and hearing. This language does not allow a precise articulation of the internal structures of conscious states and their inter-relations. It is inadequate to capture relations of the kind we are looking for between conscious states and physical states. In this thesis I refine and defend a theory of consciousness which promises to solve this regimentation problem: the representational theory of consciousness. I argue that the representational theory can solve the regimentation problem and smooth out other important obstacles to a fruitful study of consciousness. I also make a case for the theory independently of its payoffs, and I discuss the leading opposing theories at some length. In the rest of this introduction, I will clarify what I mean by "consciousness", provide an initial characterization of the representational theory, and outline my project in more detail
 
Brewer, Bill (2006). Perception and content. European Journal of Philosophy 14 (2):165-181.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links)
Abstract: It is close to current orthodoxy that perceptual experience is to be characterized, at least in part, by its representational content, roughly, by the way it represents things as being in the world around the perceiver. Call this basic idea the content view (CV)








 
Brogaard, Berit (forthcoming). Strong representationalism and centered content. Philosophical Studies.   (Google)
Abstract: I argue that strong representationalism, the view that for a perceptual experience to have a certain phenomenal character just is for it to have a certain representational content (perhaps represented in the right sort of way), encounters two problems: the dual looks problem and the duplication problem. The dual looks problem is this: strong representationalism predicts that how things phenomenally look to the subject reflects the content of the experience. But some objects phenomenally look to both have and not have certain properties, for example, my bracelet may phenomenally look to be circular-shaped and oval-shaped (and hence non-circular-shaped). So, if strong representationalism is true, then the content of my experience ought to represent my bracelet as being both circular-shaped and non-circular-shaped. Yet, intuitively, the content of my experience does not represent my bracelet as being both circular-shaped and non-circular-shaped. The duplication problem is this. On a standard conception of content, spatio-temporally distinct experiences and experiences had by distinct subjects may differ in content despite the fact that they are phenomenally indistinguishable. But this undermines the thesis that phenomenal character determines content. I argue that the two problems can be solved by applying a version of an idea from David Chalmers, which is to recognize the existence of genuinely centered properties in the content of perceptual experience
 
Brook, Andrew & Raymont, Paul (2006). The representational base of consciousness. Psyche 12 (2).   (Cited by 2 | Google)
Abstract: Current views of consciousness can be divided by whether the theorist accepts or rejects cognitivism about consciousness. Cognitivism as we understand it is the view that consciousness is just a form of representation or an information-processing property of a system that has representations or perhaps both. Anti-cognitivists deny this, appealing to thought experiments about inverted spectra, zombies and the like to argue that consciousness could change while nothing cognitive or representational changes. Nearly everyone agrees, however, that consciousness has a _representational base._ Whether consciousness _simply is_ representational or cognitive, it at least _requires _representation (and cognition). In an ecumenical spirit, we will focus on this point of agreement and sketch a theory of what this representational base might be. We hope that the result will be a framework useful for investigating consciousness empirically
 
Burge, Tyler (2003). Qualia and intentional content: Reply to Block. In Martin Hahn & B. Ramberg (eds.), Reflections and Replies: Essays on the Philosophy of Tyler Burge. MIT Press.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Burge, Tyler (1991). Vision and intentional content. In Ernest LePore & Robert Van Gulick (eds.), John Searle and His Critics. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Byrne, Alex (online). Don't PANIC: Tye's intentionalist theory of consciousness. A Field Guide to the Philosophy of Mind.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links)
Abstract: _Consciousness, Color, and Content_ is a significant contribution to our understanding of consciousness, among other things. I have learned a lot from it, as well as Tye





 
Byrne, Alex (2001). Intentionalism defended. Philosophical Review 110 (2):199-240.   (Cited by 75 | Google | More links) 












 
Byrne, Alex & Tye, Michael (2006). Qualia ain't in the head. Noûs 40 (2):241-255.   (Cited by 9 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Qualia internalism is the thesis that qualia are intrinsic to their subjects: the experiences of intrinsic duplicates (in the same or different metaphysically possible worlds) have the same qualia. Content externalism is the thesis that mental representation is an extrinsic matter, partly depending on what happens outside the head.1 Intentionalism (or representationalism) comes in strong and weak forms. In its weakest formulation, it is the thesis that representationally identical experiences of subjects (in the same or different metaphysically possible worlds) have the same qualia.2








 
Byrne, Alex (online). Tye on color and the explanatory gap.   (Google)
Abstract: It will not have escaped notice that the defendant in this afternoon
 
Chalmers, David J. (2004). The representational character of experience. In Brian Leiter (ed.), The Future for Philosophy. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 35 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Consciousness and intentionality are perhaps the two central phenomena in the philosophy of mind. Human beings are conscious beings: there is something it is like to be us. Human beings are intentional beings: we represent what is going on in the world.Correspondingly, our specific mental states, such as perceptions and thoughts, very often have a phenomenal character: there is something it is like to be in them. And these mental states very often have intentional content: they serve to represent the world. On the face of it, consciousness and intentionality are intimately connected. Our most important conscious mental states are intentional states: conscious experiences often inform us about the state of the world. And our most important intentional mental states are conscious states: there is often something it is like to represent the external world. It is natural to think that a satisfactory account of consciousness must respect its intentional structure, and that a satisfactory account of intentionality must respect its phenomenological character.With this in mind, it is surprising that in the last few decades, the philosophical study of consciousness and intentionality has often proceeded in two independent streams. This wasnot always the case. In the work of philosophers from Descartes and Locke to Brentano and Husserl, consciousness and intentionality were typically analyzed in a single package. But in the second half of the twentieth century, the dominant tendency was to concentrate on onetopic or the other, and to offer quite separate analyses of the two. On this approach, the connections between consciousness and intentionality receded into the background.In the last few years, this has begun to change. The interface between consciousness and intentionality has received increasing attention on a number of fronts. This attention has focused on such topics as the representational content of perceptual experience, the higherorder representation of conscious states, and the phenomenology of thinking. Two distinct philosophical groups have begun to emerge. One group focuses on ways in which consciousness might be grounded in intentionality. The other group focuses on ways in which intentionality might be grounded in consciousness







 
Cole, David J. (online). Dretske on naturalizing the mind.   (Google) 
 
Crane, Tim (2007). Intentionalism. In Ansgar Beckermann & Brian P. McLaughlin (eds.), Oxford Handbook to the Philosophy of Mind. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The central and defining characteristic of thoughts is that they have objects. The object of a thought is what the thought concerns, or what it is about. Since there cannot be thoughts which are not about anything, or which do not concern anything, there cannot be thoughts without objects. Mental states or events or processes which have objects in this sense are traditionally called ‘intentional,’ and ‘intentionality’ is for this reason the general term for this defining characteristic of thought. Under the heading of ‘thought’ we can include many different kinds of mental apprehension of an object—including relatively temporary episodes of contemplating or scrutinising, as well as persisting states like beliefs and hopes which are not similarly episodic in character. These are all ways of thinking about an object. But even construing ‘thought’ in this broad way, it is clear that not all mental states and events are thoughts: sensations, emotions and perceptual experiences are not thoughts, but they are also paradigmatically mental. Do these mental states and events have objects too? Or are there mental states and events which have no objects? 1 The view that all mental phenomena have objects is sometimes called ‘Brentano’s thesis’ or the thesis that intentionality is the ‘mark’ of the mental.1 Sometimes the name ‘Brentano’s thesis’ is given to certain other views too: for example, to the view that only mental phenomena are intentional, or that all and only mental phenomena are intentional, or that nothing physical is intentional. These views are, however, distinct from the view that all mental phenomena are intentional. For holding that all mental phenomena are intentional does not imply that nothing nonmental is.2 And holding that all mental phenomena are intentional does not imply (pace Dennett 1969) that nothing physical is intentional; since if physicalism were true, then the mental itself would be physical. What I am concerned with here, however, is the idea that all mental states are intentional, regardless of whether anything else is, or whether anything physical is. In recent years there has been considerable debate over whether all mental states are intentional; in particular, over whether all conscious mental states are intentional or entirely intentional..





 
Crane, Tim (2003). The intentional structure of consciousness. In Quentin Smith & Aleksandar Jokic (eds.), Consciousness: New Philosophical Perspectives. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 14 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Newcomers to the philosophy of mind are sometimes resistant to the idea that pain is a mental state. If asked to defend their view, they might say something like this: pain is a physical state, it is a state of the body. A pain in one’s leg feels to be in the leg, not ‘in the mind’. After all, sometimes people distinguish pain which is ‘all in the mind’ from a genuine pain, sometimes because the second is ‘physical’ while the first is not. And we also occasionally distinguish mental pain (which is normally understood as some kind of emotional distress) from the ‘physical pain’ one feels in one’s body. So what can be meant by saying that pain is a mental state? Of course, it only takes a little reflection shows that this naive view is mistaken. Pain is a state of consciousness, or an event in consciousness, and whether or not all states of mind are conscious, it is indisputable that only minds, or states of mind, are conscious.2 But does the naive view tell us anything about the concept of pain, or the concept of mind? I think it does. In this paper, I shall give reasons for thinking that consciousness is a form of intentionality, the mind’s ‘direction upon its objects’. I shall claim that the consciousness involved in bodily sensations like pain is constituted by the mind’s direction upon the part or region of the body where the sensation feels to be. Given this, it is less surprising that the naive view of pain says what it does: the apparent ‘physicality’ of pain is a consequence of confusing the object of the intentional state—the part of the body in which the pain is felt—with the state of being in pain






 
Davies, Paul Sheldon (1997). Deflating consciousness: A critical review of Fred Dretske's naturalizing the mind. Philosophical Psychology 10 (4):541-550.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: Fred Dretske asserts that the conscious or phenomenal experiences associated with our perceptual states—e.g. the qualitative or subjective features involved in visual or auditory states—are identical to properties that things have according to our representations of them. This is Dretske's version of the currently popular representational theory of consciousness . After explicating the core of Dretske's representational thesis, I offer two criticisms. I suggest that Dretske's view fails to apply to a broad range of mental phenomena that have rather distinctive subjective or qualitative features. I also suggest that Dretske's view, in identifying conscious experiences with features of our perceptual states, casts its aim too low. It deflates further than it should and, in consequence, fails to capture what are arguably some of the most important phenomena associated with our conscious lives
 
Deutsch, Max (2005). Intentionalism and intransitivity. Synthese 144 (1):1-22.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: I argue in this paper that the existence of sorites series of color patches – series of color patches arranged so that the patches on each end look different in color though no two adjacent patches do – shows that the relation of same phenomenal charac­ter as is not a transitive relation. I then argue that the intransitivity of same phenomenal character as conflicts with certain versions of intentionalism, the view that an experiences phenomenal character is exhausted, or fully determined by its intentional content. Lastly, I consider various objections to the arguments and reply to them






 
Dilworth, John B. (2007). Representationalism and indeterminate perceptual content. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 6 (3):369-387.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Representationalists currently cannot explain counter-examples that involve _indeterminate _perceptual content, but a _double content_ (DC) view is more promising. Four related cases of perceptual imprecision are used to outline the DC view, which also applies to imprecise photographic content. Next, inadequacies in the more standard single content (SC) view are demonstrated. The results are then generalized so as to apply to the content of any kinds of non-conventional representation. The paper continues with evidence that a DC account provides a moderate rather than extreme realist account of perception, and it concludes with an initial analysis of the failure of nomic covariance accounts of information in indeterminacy cases







 
Dorsch, Fabian, Transparency and imagining seeing.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: One of the most powerful arguments against intentionalism and in favour of disjunctivism about perceptual experiences has been formulated by M. G. F. Martin in his paper The Transparency of Experience. The overall structure of this argument may be stated in the form of a triad of claims which are jointly inconsistent





 
Dretske, Fred (2003). Experience as representation. Philosophical Issues 13 (1):67-82.   (Cited by 11 | Google | More links) 





 
Dretske, Fred (1995). Naturalizing the Mind. MIT Press.   (Cited by 674 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In this provocative book, Fred Dretske argues that to achieve an understanding of the mind it is not enough to understand the biological machinery by means of...








 
Dretske, Fred (2000). Reply to Lopes. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 60 (2):455-459.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links) 





 
Droege, Paula (2003). Caging the Beast: A Theory of Sensory Consciousness. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 






 
Droege, Paula (ms). Second sense: A theory of sensory consciousness.   (Google) 
 
Earle, David C. (1998). On the roles of consciousness and representations in visual science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 21 (6):757-758.   (Google)
Abstract: It is argued that there is a role for the representational conception of vision, and that this is compatible with the task-level account advocated by Pessoa et al. However, the role of representations must be understood independently of our conscious experience of vision
 
Ellis, Jonathan (2010). Phenomenal character, phenomenal concepts, and externalism. Philosophical Studies 147 (2).   (Google)
Abstract: A celebrated problem for representationalist theories of phenomenal character is that, given externalism about content, these theories lead to externalism about phenomenal character. While externalism about content is widely accepted, externalism about phenomenal character strikes many philosophers as wildly implausible. Even if internally identical individuals could have different thoughts, it is said, if one of them has a headache, or a tingly sensation, so must the other. In this paper, I argue that recent work on phenomenal concepts reveals that, contrary to appearances, this standard conjunction of externalism about content and internalism about phenomenal character is ultimately untenable on other models of phenomenal character as well, including even “qualia realism.” This would be significant for a number of reasons. The first is patent: it would undermine a primary objection to representationalism. The fact that representationalism is incompatible with the conjunction would be no serious problem for representationalism if no other plausible model of phenomenal character is compatible with it. The second is that the many philosophers who embrace the conjunction would be forced to abandon one of the two views; externalism would be true either of both content and phenomenal character, or of neither. Likewise, those philosophers who have taken a stance on only one of the two internalism/externalism debates would have to be seen as thereby committed to a particular stance on the other. The third reason stems from the fact that qualia realism typically goes hand in hand with internalism about phenomenal character. To the extent that it does, my argument would reveal that qualia realism is itself in tension with externalism about content. This would perhaps be the most surprising result of all
 
Gamble, Denise (1997). P-consciousness presentation/a-consciousness representation. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 20 (1):149-150.   (Google)
Abstract: P-Consciousness (P) is to be understood in terms of an immediate fluctuating continuum that is a presentation of raw experiential matter against which A-consciousness (A) acts to objectify, impose form or make determinate “thinkable” contents. A representationalises P but P is not itself representational, at least in terms of some concepts of “representation.” Block's arguments fall short of establishing that P is representational and, given the sort of cognitive science assumptions he is working with, he is unable to account for the aspect of phenomenal content that he thinks goes beyond “representational” content. BBS discussion reveals the need for greater analysis and justification for a representationalist thesis of P
 
Gilman, Daniel (1997). Consciousness and mental representation. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 20 (1):150-151.   (Google)
Abstract: Block (1995t) has argued for a noncognitive and non- representational notion of phenomenal consciousness, but his putative examples of this phenomenon are conspicuous in their representational and functional properties while they do not clearly possess other phenomenal properties
 
Glock, H. J. (2003). Neural representationalism. Facta Philosophica 5 (1):105-129.   (Google) 
 
Gray, Richard (2003). Tye's representationalism: Feeling the heat? Philosophical Studies 115 (3):245-256.   (Google)
Abstract: According to Tyes PANIC theory of consciousness, perceptualstates of creatures which are related to a disjunction ofexternal contents will fail to represent sensorily, andthereby fail to be conscious states. In this paper I arguethat heat perception, a form of perception neglected in therecent literature, serves as a counterexample to Tyesradical externalist claim. Having laid out Tyes `absentqualia scenario, the PANIC theory from which it derivesand the case of heat perception as a counterexample, Idefend the putative counterexample against three possibleresponses: (1) that heat perception represents general(i.e. non-disjunctive) intrinsic properties of objects,(2) that heat perception represents the non-specific heatenergy that is transferred between a subjects body andanother body and (3) that heat perception exclusivelyrepresents heat properties of the subjects own body
 
Gunderson, Keith (1972). Content and Consciousness. And the Mind-Body Problem.   (Google) 
 
Guzeldere, Guven & Aydede, Murat (2000). On the relation between phenomenal and representational properties. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 20 (1):151-153.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: We argue that Block's charge of fallacy remains ungrounded unless the existence of P-consciousness, as Block construes it, is independently established. However, this depends on establishing the existence of "phenomenal properties" that, according to Block, are essentially not representational, cognitive, or functional. We argue that Block fails to make a case for the existence of P-consciousness so long as he fails to make a case for the existence of phenomenal properties _so construed_ . We conclude by suggesting that phenomenal consciousness can be accounted for in terms of a hybrid set of representational and functional properties









 
Guzeldere, Guven & Aydede, Murat (1997). On the relation between phenomenal and representational properties. [Journal (Paginated)].   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This is a commentary on Block' article article, "On a Confusion About a Concept of Consciousness," BBS (1995) 18:2. We argue that BlockÕs charge of fallacy remains ungrounded unless the existence of P-consciousness, as Block construes it, is independently established. How-ever, this depends on establishing the existence of "phenomenal properties" that, according to Block, are essentially not representational, cognitive, or functional. We argue that Block fails to make a case for the existence of P-consciousness so long as he fails to make a case for the existence of phenomenal properties so construed. We conclude by suggesting that phenomenal consciousness can be accounted for in terms of a hybrid set of representational and functional properties





 
Güzeldere, Güven & Aydede, Murat (1997). On the relation between phenomenal and representational properties. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 20 (1):151-153.   (Google)
Abstract: We argue that Block's charge of fallacy remains ungrounded so long as the existence of P-consciousness, as Block construes it, is independently established. This, in turn, depends on establishing the existence of “phenomenal properties” that are essentially not representational, cognitive, or functional. We argue that Block leaves this fundamental thesis unsubstantiated. We conclude by suggesting that phenomenal consciousness can be accounted for in terms of a hybrid set of representational and functional properties
 
Hall, Richard J. (2008). If it itches, scratch! Australasian Journal of Philosophy 86 (4):525 – 535.   (Google)
Abstract: Many bodily sensations are connected quite closely with specific actions: itches with scratching, for example, and hunger with eating. Indeed, these connections have the feel of conceptual connections. With the exception of D. M. Armstrong, philosophers have largely neglected this aspect of bodily sensations. In this paper, I propose a theory of bodily sensations that explains these connections. The theory ascribes intentional content to bodily sensations but not, strictly speaking, representational content. Rather, the content of these sensations is an imperative: in the case of itches, 'Scratch!' The view avoids non-intentional qualia and hence accords with what could be called, generalizing Lycan slightly, the 'hegemony of intentionality'
 
Harman, Gilbert (1990). The intrinsic quality of experience. Philosophical Perspectives 4:31-52.   (Cited by 245 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 






 
Haselager, Pim; de Groot, A. & van Rappard, H. (2003). Representationalism vs. anti-representationalism: A debate for the sake of appearance. Philosophical Psychology 16 (1):5-23.   (Cited by 19 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In recent years the cognitive science community has witnessed the rise of a new, dynamical approach to cognition. This approach entails a framework in which cognition and behavior are taken to result from complex dynamical interactions between brain, body, and environment. The advent of the dynamical approach is grounded in a dissatisfaction with the classical computational view of cognition. A particularly strong claim has been that cognitive systems do not rely on internal representations and computations. Focusing on this claim, we take as a starting point a question recently raised by Cliff and Noble: " if evolution did produce a design that used internal representations, how would we recognize it?" (Knowledge-based vision and simple visual machines, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society: Biological Sciences, 352 , 1165-1175, 1997). We will argue that cognitive science lacks a proper operationalization of the notion of representation, and therefore is unable to fruitfully discuss whether a particular system has representations or not. A basic method to detect representations in a physical system, grounded in isomorphism, turns out to be quite unconstrained. We will look at a practical example of this problem by examining the debate on whether or not van Gelder's (What might cognition be, if not computation? Journal of Philosophy, 92 , 345-381, 1995) controversial example of the Watt Governor is representational. We will conclude that cognitive science, as of yet, has no empirically applicable means to answer Cliff and Noble's question unequivocally. This makes the recent representationalism vs. anti-representationalism debate a debate for the sake of appearance







 
Hellie, Benj (2002). Consciousness and representationalism. In L. Nadel (ed.), Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science. Macmillan.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Hellie, Benj (2001). Presence to the Mind: Issues in the Intentional Theory of Consciousness. Dissertation, Princeton University   (Google) 
 
Hellie, Benj (2009). Representationalism. In Patrick Wilken, Tim Bayne & Axel Cleeremans (eds.), Oxford Companion to Consciousness. Oxford UP.   (Google) 
 
Hill, Christopher S. (2006). Harman on self referential thoughts. Philosophical Issues 16 (1):346-357.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: I will be concerned in these pages with the views that Gilbert Harman puts forward in his immensely stimulating paper Self-Reflexive Thoughts.<sup>1</sup> Harman maintains that self referential thoughts are possible, and also that they are useful. I applaud both of these claims. An example of a self referential thought is the thought that every thought, including this present one, has a logical structure. I feel sure that this thought exists, for I have entertained it on a number of occasions. Moreover, I feel that it is extremely useful. Without deploying it, how could we tell the whole truth about the nature of thoughts?





 
Hopkins, James (ms). Representation of the inner and the concept of mind.   (Google)
Abstract: Three philosophical problems -- the problem of the external world, the problem of other minds, and the problem of consciousness -- seem rooted in the way we conceive experience. We tend to think of our experiences as having a nature which is radically distinct from that of the world which they present to us. This emerges in a series of oppositions as between experience and the world, which we can set out as follows
 
Hubbard, Timothy L. (2007). What is mental representation? And how does it relate to consciousness? Journal of Consciousness Studies 14 (1):37-61.   (Google)
Abstract: The relationship between mental representation and consciousness is considered. What it means to 'represent', and several types of representation (e.g., analogue, digital, spatial, linguistic, mathematical), are described. Concepts relevant to mental representation in general (e.g., multiple levels of processing, structure/process differences, mapping) and in specific domains (e.g., mental imagery, linguistic/propositional theories, production systems, connectionism, dynamics) are discussed. Similarities (e.g., using distinctions between different forms of representation to predict different forms of consciousness, parallels between digital architectures of the brain and connectionist models) and dissociations (e.g., insensitivity to gaps in subjective experience, explicit memory/implicit memory, automatic processing/controlled processing, blindsight, neglect, prediction/ explanation) of mental representation and consciousness are discussed. It is concluded that representational systems are separable from consciousness systems, and that mental representation appears necessary but not sufficient for consciousness. Considerations for future research on correspondences between representation and consciousness are suggested
 
Jackson, Frank (2007). Colour for representationalists. Erkenntnis 66 (1-2):169--85.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Redness is the property that makes things look red in normal circumstances. That seems obvious enough. But then colour is whatever property does that job: a certain reflectance profile as it might be. Redness is the property something is represented to have when it looks red. That seems obvious enough. But looking red does not represent that which looks red as having a certain reflectance profile. What should we say about this antinomy and how does our answer impact on the contest between realism and subjectivism about colour? I address the issues through the lens of a representationalist position on colour experience





 
Jackson, Frank (1998). Causal roles and higher-order properties. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 58 (3):657-661.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 




 
Jacovides, Michael (ms). Do experiences represent?   (Google) 
 
Jackson, Frank (2004). Representation and experience. In Hugh Clapin (ed.), Representation in Mind. Elsevier.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Jackson, Frank (ms). Some reflections on representationalism.   (Google) 
 
Jackson, Frank (2006). The knowledge argument, diaphanousness, representationalism. In Torin Alter & Sven Walter (eds.), Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Jagnow, René (2009). How representationalism can account for the phenomenal significance of illumination. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 8 (4).   (Google)
Abstract: In this paper, I defend a representationalist account of the phenomenal character of color experiences. Representationalism, the thesis that phenomenal character supervenes on a certain kind of representational content, so-called phenomenal content, has been developed primarily in two different ways, as Russellian and Fregean representationalism. While the proponents of Russellian and Fregean representationalism differ with respect to what they take the contents of color experiences to be, they typically agree that colors are exhaustively characterized by the three dimensions of the color solid: hue, saturation, and lightness. I argue that a viable version of representationalism needs to renounce this restriction to three dimensions and consider illumination to be a genuine phenomenal dimension of color. My argument for this thesis falls into two parts. I first consider the phenomenon of color constancy in order to show that neither Russellian nor Fregean representationalism can do justice to the phenomenal significance of local illumination. I subsequently formulate a version of representationalism that accounts for illumination by taking it as a phenomenal dimension of color
 
Jakab, Zoltán (2006). Metameric surfaces: The ultimate case against color physicalism and representational theories of phenomenal consciousness. Dialectica 60 (3):283-306.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Janzen, Greg (2008). Intentionalism and change blindness. Philosophia 36 (3).   (Google)
Abstract:  According to reductive intentionalism, the phenomenal character of a conscious experience is constituted by the experience's intentional (or representational) content. In this article I attempt to show that a phenomenon in visual perception called change blindness poses a problem for this doctrine. Specifically, I argue that phenomenal character is not sensitive, as it should be if reductive intentionalism is correct, to fine-grained variations in content. The standard anti-intentionalist strategy is to adduce putative cases in which phenomenal character varies despite sameness of content. This paper explores an alternative antiintentionalist tack, arguing, by way of a specific example involving change blindness, that content can vary despite sameness of phenomenal character
 
Janzen, Greg (2006). The representational theory of phenomenal character: A phenomenological critique. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 5 (3-4):321--339.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: According to a currently popular approach to the analysis of phenomenal character mandates that the phenomenal character of an experience is entirely determined by, and is in fact identical with, the experience






 
John, James (2005). Representationism, phenomenism, and the intuitive view. Philosophical Topics 33 (1):159-184.   (Google) 
 
John, James (2005). Representationism, Phenomenism, and the Intuitive View. Philosophical topics 33:159-184.   (Google) 
 
Kalderon, Mark Eli (forthcoming). Color Illusion. Nous.   (Google)
Abstract: As standardly conceived,an illusion is an experience of an object o appearing F where o is not in fact F. Paradigm examples of color illusion, however, do not ﬁt this pattern. A diagnosis of this uncovers diﬀerent sense of appearance talk that is the basis of a dilemma for the standard conception. The dilemma is only a challenge. But if the challenge cannot be met, then any conception of experience, such as representationalism, that is committed to the standard conception is false. Perhaps surprisingly, naïve realism provides a better account of color illusion.
 
Kennedy, Matthew (2009). Heirs of nothing: The implications of transparency. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 79 (3):574-604.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Recently representationalists have cited a phenomenon known as the transparency of experience in arguments against the qualia theory. Representationalists take transparency to support their theory and to work against the qualia theory. In this paper I argue that representationalist assessment of the philosophical importance of transparency is incorrect. The true beneficiary of transparency is another theory, naïve realism. Transparency militates against qualia and the representationalist theory of experience. I describe the transparency phenomenon, and I use my description to argue for naïve realism and against representationalism and the qualia theory. I also examine the relationship between phenomenological study and phenomenal character, and discuss the results in connection with the argument from hallucination





 
Kind, Amy (2007). Restrictions on representationalism. Philosophical Studies 134:405-427.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links)
Abstract: According to representationalism, the qualitative character of our phenomenal mental states supervenes on the intentional content of such states. Strong representationalism makes a further claim: the qualitative character of our phenomenal mental states _consists in_ the intentional content of such states. Although strong representationalism has greatly increased in popularity over the last decade, I find the view deeply implausible. In what follows, I will attempt to argue against strong representationalism by a two-step argument. First, I suggest that strong representationalism must be _unrestricted_ in order to serve as an adequate theory of qualia, i.e., it must apply to all qualitative mental states. Second, I present considerations to show that an unrestricted form of strong representationalism is problematic








 
Kind, Amy (2003). What's so transparent about transparency? Philosophical Studies 115 (3):225-244.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Intuitions about the transparency of experience have recently begun to play a key role in the debate about qualia. Specifically, such intuitions have been used by representationalists to support their view that the phenomenal character of our experience can be wholly explained in terms of its intentional content.[i] But what exactly does it mean to say that experience is transparent? In my view, recent discussions of transparency leave matters considerably murkier than one would like. As I will suggest, there is reason to believe that experience is not transparent in the way that representationalism requires. Although there is a sense in which experience can be said to be transparent, transparency in this sense does not give us any particular motivation for representationalism—or at least, not the pure or strong representationalism that it is usually invoked to support






 
Kriegel, Uriah (2002). Phenomenal content. Erkenntnis 57 (2):175-198.   (Cited by 12 | Google | More links) 








 
Kriegel, Uriah (2002). PANIC theory and the prospects for a representational theory of phenomenal consciousness. Philosophical Psychology 15 (1):55-64.   (Cited by 8 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Michael Tye has recently argued that the phenomenal character of conscious experiences is "one and the same as" (1) Poised (2) Abstract (3) Non-conceptual (4) Intentional Content (PANIC). Tye argues extensively that PANIC Theory accounts for differences in phenomenal character in representational terms. But another task of a theory of phenomenal consciousness is to account for the difference between those mental states that have phenomenal character at all and those that do not. By going through each of the four qualifiers of PANIC, we argue that PANIC Theory fails to account for this difference in genuinely representational terms. We suggest, furthermore, that the reasons it fails are likely to be endemic to all representational theories of phenomenal consciousness








 
Kuczynski, John-Michael M. (2004). Some arguments against intentionalism. Acta Analytica 19 (32):107-141.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: Recently, many have argued that phenomenal content supervenes on representational content; i.e. that the phenomenal character of an experience is wholly determined (metaphysically, not causally) by the representational content of that experience. This paper it identifies many counter-examples to intentionalism. Further, this paper shows that, if intentionalism were correct, that would require that an untenable form of representational atomism also be correct. Our argument works both against the idea that phenomenal content supervenes on “conceptual” content and also against the idea that it supervenes on “non-conceptual” content. It is also shown that the distinction between conceptual and non-conceptual content has been wrongly conceived as distinction between different kinds of information: in fact, it is a distinction between ways of packaging information that is, in itself, neither conceptual or non-conceptual
 
LeGrand, Dorothy (2005). Transparently oneself: Commentary on Metzinger's Being No-One. Psyche 11 (5).   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Different points of Metzinger's position makes it a peculiar form of representationalism: (1) his distinction between intentional and phenomenal content, in relation to the internalism/externalism divide; (2) the notion of transparency defined at a phenomenal and not epistemic level, together with (3) the felt inwardness of experience. The distinction between reflexive and pre-reflexive phenomenal internality will allow me to reconsider Metzinger's theory of the self and to propose an alternative conception that I will describe both at an epistemic and a phenomenal level






 
Levine, Joseph (1997). Are qualia just representations? Mind and Language 12:101-13.   (Google) 
 
Levine, Joseph (2003). Experience and representation. In Quentin Smith & Aleksandar Jokic (eds.), Consciousness: New Philosophical Perspectives. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Levi, Don S. (1997). Representation: The eleventh problem of consciousness. Inquiry 40 (4):457-473.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 





 
Levine, Joseph (2008). Secondary Qualities: Where Consciousness and Intentionality Meet. Monist 91 (2).   (Google) 
 
Lloyd, Dan (1997). Consciousness and its discontents. Communication and Cognition 30 (3-4):273-284.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google)




  
Lloyd, Dan (1991). Leaping to conclusions: Connectionism, consciousness, and the computational mind. In Terence E. Horgan & John L. Tienson (eds.), Connectionism and the Philosophy of Mind. Kluwer.   (Cited by 9 | Annotation | Google)




  
Lomas, Dennis (1998). Representational theory emerges unscathed. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 21 (6):764-765.   (Google)
Abstract: Representationalism emerges unscathed from Pessoa et al.'s attack. They fail to undermine a key reason for its influence: it has the theoretical resources to explain many illusory visual experiences such as illusory contours and features. Furthermore, in attempting to undermine representationalism, the authors seem to erect an unduly inflated distinction between neural accounts of perception and personal-level accounts of perception
 
Lopes, Dominic M. M. (2000). What is it like to see with your ears? The representational theory of mind. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 60 (2):439-453.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links) 





 
Luccio, Riccardo (2003). Isomorphism and representationalism. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 26 (4):418-419.   (Google)
Abstract: Lehar tries to build a computational theory that succeeds in offering the same computational model for both phenomenal experience and visual processing. However, the vision that Lehar has about isomorphism in Gestalttheorie as representational, is not adequate. The main limit of Lehar's model derives from this misunderstanding of the relation between phenomenal and physiological levels
 
Lurz, Robert W. (2000). A defense of first-order representationalist theories of mental-state consciousness. Psyche 6 (1).   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Lycan, William G. (1996). Consciousness and Experience. MIT Press.   (Cited by 346 | Google) 
 
Lycan, William G. (1998). In defense of the representational theory of qualia. Philosophical Perspectives 12:479-87.   (Google) 
 
Lycan, William G. (1998). In defense of the representational theory of qualia (replies to Neander, Rey, and tye). Philosophical Perspectives 12.   (Google) 
 
Lycan, William G. (1996). Layered perceptual representation. Philosophical Issues 7:81-100.   (Cited by 15 | Google | More links) 





 
Lycan, William G. (1987). Phenomenal objects: A backhanded defense. Philosophical Perspectives 3:513-26.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Lycan, William G. (online). Representational theories of consciousness. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.   (Cited by 10 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The idea of representation has been central in discussions of intentionality for many years. But only more recently has it begun playing a wider role in the philosophy of mind, particularly in theories of consciousness. Indeed, there are now multiple representational theories of consciousness, corresponding to different uses of the term "conscious," each attempting to explain the corresponding phenomenon in terms of representation. More cautiously, each theory attempts to explain its target phenomenon in terms of _intentionality_, and assumes that intentionality is representation





 
Lycan, William G. (2001). Response to Polger and Flanagan. Minds and Machines 11 (1):127-132.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Lycan, William G. (1996). Replies to Tomberlin, Tye, Stalnaker and Block. Philosophical Issues 7:127-142.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 





 
Macpherson, Fiona (2006). Ambiguous figures and the content of experience. Noûs 40 (1):82-117.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Representationalism is the position that the phenomenal character of an experience is either identical with, or supervenes on, the content of that experience. Many representationalists hold that the relevant content of experience is nonconceptual. I propose a counter-example to this form of representationalism that arises from the phenomenon of Gestalt switching, which occurs when viewing ambiguous figures. First, I argue that one does not need to appeal to the conceptual content of experience or to judge- ments to account for Gestalt switching. I then argue that experiences of certain ambiguous figures are problematic because they have different phenomenal characters but that no difference in the nonconceptual content of these experiences can be identified. I consider three solutions to this problem that have been proposed by both philosophers and psychologists and conclude that none can account for all the ambiguous figures that pose the problem. I conclude that the onus is on representationalists to specify the relevant difference in content or to abandon their position







 
Macpherson, Fiona (2005). Colour inversion problems for representationalism. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 70 (1):127-152.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper I examine whether representationalism can account for various thought experiments about colour inversions. Representationalism is, at minimum, the view that, necessarily, if two experiences have the same representational content then they have the same phenomenal character. I argue that representationalism ought to be rejected if one holds externalist views about experiential content and one holds traditional exter- nalist views about the nature of the content of propositional attitudes. Thus, colour inver- sion scenarios are more damaging to externalist representationalist views than have been previously thought. More specifically, I argue that representationalists who endorse externalism about experiential content either have to become internalists about the content of propositional attitudes or they have to adopt a novel variety of externalism about the content of propositional attitudes. This novel type of propositional attitude externalism is investigated. It can be seen that adopting it forces one to reject Putnam








 
Macpherson, Fiona (2003). Novel colours and the content of experience. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 84 (1):43-66.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links)
Abstract: I propose a counterexample to naturalistic representational theories of phenomenal character. The counterexample is generated by experiences of novel colours reported by Crane and Piantanida. I consider various replies that a representationalist might make, including whether novel colours could be possible colours of objects and whether one can account for novel colours as one would account for binary colours or colour mixtures. I argue that none of these strategies is successful and therefore that one cannot fully explain the nature of the phenomenal character of perceptual experiences using a naturalistic conception of representation











 
Macpherson, Fiona (1999). Perfect pitch and the content of experience. Philosophy and Anthropology 3 (2).   (Google | More links) 




 
Macpherson, Fiona (2000). Representational Theories of Phenomenal Character. Dissertation, University of Stirling   (Google | More links) 




 
Mandik, Pete (2009). Beware of the unicorn: Consciousness as being represented and other things that don't exist. Journal of Consciousness Studies 16 (1):5-36.   (Google)
Abstract: Higher-Order Representational theories of consciousness — HORs — primarily seek to explain a mental state’s being conscious in terms of the mental state’s being represented by another mental state. First-Order Representational theories of consciousness — FORs — primarily seek to explain a property’s being phenomenal in terms of the property being represented in experience. Despite differences in both explanans and explananda, HORs and FORs share a reliance on there being such a property as being represented. In this paper I develop an argument — the Unicorn Argument — against both HORs and FORs. The core of the Unicorn is that since there are mental rep- resentations of things that do not exist, there cannot be any such prop- erty as being represented, and thus no such property with which to identify either being conscious or being phenomenal.
 
Mandik, Pete (1999). Qualia, space, and control. Philosophical Psychology 12 (1):47-60.   (Cited by 15 | Google | More links)
Abstract: According to representionalists, qualia-the introspectible properties of sensory experience-are exhausted by the representational contents of experience. Representationalists typically advocate an informational psychosemantics whereby a brain state represents one of its causal antecedents in evolutionarily determined optimal circumstances. I argue that such a psychosemantics may not apply to certain aspects of our experience, namely, our experience of space in vision, hearing, and touch. I offer that these cases can be handled by supplementing informational psychosemantics with a procedural psychosemantics whereby a representation is about its effects instead of its causes. I discuss conceptual and empirical points that favor a procedural representationalism for our experience of space










 
Marcus, Eric (2006). Intentionalism and the imaginability of the inverted spectrum. Philosophical Quarterly 56 (224):321-339.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: There has been much written in recent years about whether a pair of subjects could have visual experiences that represented the colors of objects in their environment in precisely the same way, despite differing significantly in what it was like to undergo them, differing that is, in their qualitative character. The possibility of spectrum inversion has been so much debated1 in large part because of the threat that it would pose to the more general doctrine of Intentionalism, according to which the representational content of an experience fixes what it






 
Maund, J. Barry (online). Tye on phenomenal character and color.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
McCulloch, Gregory (1993). The very idea of the phenomenological. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 67:39-57.   (Cited by 8 | Annotation | Google)




  
McIntyre, Ronald (1999). Naturalizing phenomenology? Dretske on qualia. In Ronald McIntyre (ed.), Naturalizing Phenomenology. Stanford: Stanford University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: in Naturalizing Phenomenology: Contemporary Phenomenology and Cognitive Science, ed. by Jean Petitot et al. (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999), pp. 429-439
 
Metzinger, Thomas (2004). The subjectivity of subjective experience: A representationalist analysis of the first-person perspective. Networks.   (Cited by 39 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Before one can even begin to model consciousness and what exactly it means that it is a subjective phenomenon one needs a theory about what a first-person perspective really is. This theory has to be conceptually convincing, empirically plausible and, most of all, open to new developments. The chosen conceptual framework must be able to accommodate scientific progress. Its ba- sic assumptions have to be plastic as it were, so that new details and empirical data can continuously be fed into the theoretical model as it grows and becomes more refined. This paper makes an attempt at sketching the outlines of such a theory, offering a representationalist analysis of the phenomenal first-person perspective. Three phenomenal target properties are centrally relevant:


















 
Miguens, Sofia (2002). Qualia or non epistemic perception: D. Dennett's and F. Dretske's representational theories of consciousness. Agora 21 (2):193-208.   (Google) 
 
Millar, Boyd (2010). Peacocke's trees. Synthese 174 (3).   (Google)
Abstract: In Sense and Content , Christopher Peacocke points out that two equally-sized trees at different distances from the perceiver are normally represented to be the same size, despite the fact that in a certain sense the nearer tree looks bigger ; he concludes on the basis of this observation that visual experiences possess irreducibly phenomenal properties. This argument has received the most attention of all of Peacocke’s arguments for separatism—the view that the intentional and phenomenal properties of experiences are independent of one another. However, despite its notoriety, the argument is widely misunderstood and underappreciated. I argue that once the structure of the argument is clarified and the replies that have been offered are considered closely, one must conclude that the trees argument is successful
 
Neander, Karen (1998). The division of phenomenal labor: A problem for representationalist theories of consciousness. Philosophical Perspectives 12:411-34.   (Cited by 24 | Google | More links) 









 
Nickel, Bernhard (2006). Against intentionalism. Philosophical Studies.   (Cited by 3 | Google)
Abstract: Intentionalism is the claim that the phenomenological properties of a perceptual experience supervene on its intentional properties. The paper presents a counterexample to this claim, one that concerns visual grouping phenomenology. I argue that this example is superior to super?cially similar examples involving grouping phenomenology offered by Peacocke (1983), because the standard intentionalist responses to Peacocke
 
Noordhof, Paul (2001). In pain. Analysis 61 (2):95-97.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links)
Abstract: When I feel a pain in my leg, how should we understand the







 
Noordhof, Paul (2002). More in pain. Analysis 62 (2):153-154.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
O'Dea, John (2006). Representationalism, supervenience, and the cross-modal problem. Philosophical Studies 130 (2):285-95.   (Google)
Abstract: The representational theory of phenomenal experience is often stated in terms of a supervenience thesis: Byrne recently characterises it as the thesis that “there can be no difference in phenomenal character without a difference in content”, while according to Tye, “[a]t a minimum, the thesis is one of supervenience: necessarily, experiences that are alike in their representational contents are alike in their phenomenal character.” Consequently, much of the debate over whether representationalism is true centres on purported counter-examples – that is to say, purported failures of supervenience. The refutation of putative counter-examples has been, it seems to me, by and large successful. But there is a certain class of these for which the representationalist response has been something less than completely convincing. These are the cross-modality cases. I will explain what I mean, and then argue that the response in question is not only unconvincing but actually undermines the representationalist position. 
 
O'Dea, John (2008). Transparency and the unity of experience. In E. Wright (ed.), The Case for Qualia. MIT Press.   (Google)
Abstract: If we assume that the operation of each sense modality constitutes a different experience – a visual experience, an auditory experience, etc – we are faced with the problem of how those distinct experiences come together to form a unified perceptual encounter with the world. Michael Tye has recently argued that the best way to get around this problem is to deny altogether that there are such things as purely visual (and so forth) experiences. Here I aim to show not simply that Tye’s proposed solution fails, but that its failure is highly instructive because it allows us to see that the transparency thesis, which lies at the heart of the case against qualia, and of most representationalist theories of experience, is more problematic than is often supposed
 
O'Dea, John (forthcoming). A Proprioceptive Account of the Senses. In Fiona Macpherson (ed.), The Senses: Classical and Contemporary Philosophical Perspectives. OUP.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Representationalist theories of sensory experience are often thought to be vulnerable to the existence of apparently non-representational differences between experiences in different sensory modalities. Seeing and hearing seem to differ in their qualia, quite apart from what they represent. The origin of this idea is perhaps Grice’s argument, in “Some Remarks on the Senses,” that the senses are distinguished by “introspectible character.” In this chapter I take the Representationalist side by putting forward an account of sense modalities which is consistent with that view and yet pays due regard to the intuition behind Grice’s argument. Employing J.J. Gibson’s distinction between exploratory and performatory behaviour, I point to a proprioceptive element in perceptual experience, and identify this as crucial in any account of what makes a particular way of perceiving a sense modality.





 
Pace, Michael (2007). Blurred vision and the transparency of experience. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 88 (3):328–354.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper considers an objection to intentionalism (the view that the phenomenal character of experience supervenes on intentional content) based on the phenomenology of blurred vision. Several intentionalists, including Michael Tye, Fred Dretske, and Timothy Crane, have proposed intentionalist explanations of blurred vision phenomenology. I argue that their proposals fail and propose a solution of my own that, I contend, is the only promising explanation consistent with intentionalism. The solution, however, comes at a cost for intentionalists; it involves rejecting the "transparency of experience", a doctrine that has been the basis for the central argument in favor of intentionalism





 
Pacherie,  (1999). Leibhaftigkeit and representational theories of perception. In Naturalizing Phenomenology. Stanford: Stanford University Press.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Pacherie, Elisabeth (1999). Qualia and representations. In Denis Fisette (ed.), Consciousness and Intentionality: Models and Modalities of Attribution.   (Google | More links) 






 
Parnas, Josef & Zahavi, Dan (1998). Phenomenal consciousness and self-awareness: A phenomenological critique of representational theory. Journal of Consciousness Studies 5 (5-6):687-705.   (Google) 
 
Pautz, Adam (2006). Sensory awareness is not a wide physical relation: An empirical argument against externalist intentionalism. Noûs 40 (2):205-240.   (Cited by 8 | Google | More links) 








 
Pautz, Adam (online). Tracking intentionalism and optimal conditions: A reply to Byrne and Tye.   (Google)
Abstract: In the mid-nineties, Fred Dretske, William Lycan and Michael Tye published books defending an ambitious new reductive program. The program came in two stages. The first was to defend Intentionalism. The second was to reduce the secondary qualities to external physical properties and then to explain sensory representation in terms of tracking under optimal conditions or biological function. The old reductive program was internalist: the idea used to be that we could reduce experiences to brain states. The new reductive program is externalist
 
Phillips, Ian (2005). Experience and Intentional Content. Dissertation, Oxford University   (Google)
Abstract: Strong or Pure Intentionalism is the claim that the phenomenal character of any perceptual experience can be exhaustively characterized solely by reference to its Intentional content. Strong or Pure Anti -Intentionalism is the claim that the phenomenal character of any perceptual experience can be exhaustively characterized solely by reference to its non-Intentional properties
 
Pitson, A. E. (1986). The new representationalism. Philosophical Papers 15 (August):41-49.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Platchias, Dimitris (2008). Representationalism, symmetrical supervenience and identity. Philosophia 37 (1).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: According to some representationalists (M. Tye, Ten problems of consciousness, MIT Press, Massachusetts, USA, 1995; W.G. Lycan, Consciousness and experience, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, 1996; F. Dretske, Naturalising the mind, MIT Press, Massachusetts, USA 1995), qualia are identical to external environmental states or features. When one perceives a red rose for instance, one is visually representing the actual redness of the rose. The represented redness of the rose is the actual redness of the rose itself. Thus redness is not a property of one’s experience but an externally constituted property of the perceived physical object. In this sense, qualia are out there, in the external world. Here, I argue that the main representationalist arguments to this effect, if successful, establish no more than a symmetrical supervenience relation between representational content and qualia, and that a supervenience relation alone (albeit symmetrical) doesn’t suffice for identity. This supervenience thesis between qualia and representational content leaves open the question as to the essential nature of qualia





 
Polger, Thomas W. & Flanagan, Owen J. (2001). A decade of teleofunctionalism: Lycan's consciousness and consciousness and experience. Minds and Machines 11 (1):113-126.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 






 
Pouresmail, Yasser (ms). A Representational Account of the Ineffability of Consciousness.   (Google | More links) 




 
Pouresmail, Yasser (ms). Phombie and the Transparency Thesis.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper, I will deal with the possibility conditions of transparency thesis (TT). I shall argue that TT is itself a feature of our phenomenology, thus, it doesn't entail an externalist account of qualia. I will make my point by devising two different scenarios in one of which, those relevant features are missing, and in the second one, those relevant features are available. In the first case, I will argue, TT does not work, and in the second one, it works but without there being a represented content in the environment. Thereby I will show that TT is itself grounded in some pure phenomenological features and by no means indicates that phenomenology is constituted by the representational character of experience.





 
Prosser, Simon (forthcoming). The two-dimensional content of consciousness. Philosophical Studies 136:319--349.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper I put forward a representationalist theory of conscious experience based on Robert Stalnaker





 
Radner, Daisie (1976). Representationalism in Arnauld's act theory of perception. Journal of the History of Philosophy 14 (1).   (Google) 
 
Raftopoulos, Athanassios & Müller, Vincent C. (2006). The phenomenal content of experience. Mind and Language 21 (2):187-219.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: We discuss in some length evidence from the cognitive science suggesting that the representations of objects based on spatiotemporal information and featural information retrieved bottomup from a visual scene precede representations of objects that include conceptual information. We argue that a distinction can be drawn between representations with conceptual and nonconceptual content. The distinction is based on perceptual mechanisms that retrieve information in conceptually unmediated ways. The representational contents of the states induced by these mechanisms that are available to a type of awareness called phenomenal awareness constitute the phenomenal content of experience. The phenomenal content of perception contains the existence of objects as separate things that persist in time and time, spatiotemporal information, and information regarding relative spatial relations, motion, surface properties, shape, size, orientation, color, and their functional properties







 
Raymont, Paul (online). Some experienced qualities belong to the experience.   (Google)
Abstract: In this paper, a criticism of representationalist views of consciousness is developed. These views are often supported by an appeal to a transparency thesis about conscious states, according to which an experience does not itself possess the qualities of which it makes one conscious. The experience makes one conscious of these qualities by representing them, not by instantiating them. Against this, it is argued that some of the properties of which one is conscious are had by the conscious state itself. Only by adopting this view can we account for certain perceptual incompatibilities, such as the fact that one cannot see a stick as being both bent and not bent. This sort of experience is impossible because it would require that an experience have, and not just represent, incompatible features
 
Rey, Georges (2004). A deflated intentionalist alternative to Clark's unexplanatory metaphysics. Philosophical Psychology 17 (4):519-540.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Throughout his discussion, Clark speaks constantly of phenomenal and qualitative properties. But properties, like any other posited entities, ought to earn their explanatory keep, and this I don't think Clark's phenomenal or qualitative properties actually do. I argue that all the work he enlists for them could be done better by purely intentional contents of our sentient states; that is, they could better be regarded as mere intentional properties, not real ones. Clark eschews such intentionalism, but I see no reason for him to resist a properly deflated version of it that I sketch. Moreover, such intentionalism seems to me to stand a better chance than Clark's reliance on properties in explaining the peculiar ways in which experience appears to us that so concern the qualiaphile








 
Rey, Georges (1998). A narrow representationalist account of qualitative experience. Philosophical Perspectives 12:435-58.   (Cited by 23 | Google | More links) 








 
Rey, Georges (1991). Sensations in a language of thought. Philosophical Issues 1:73-112.   (Cited by 13 | Google | More links) 





 
Rey, Georges (1993). Sensational sentences. In Martin Davies & Glyn W. Humphreys (eds.), Consciousness: Philosophical and Psychological Essays. Blackwell.   (Cited by 22 | Annotation | Google)




  
Rinofner-Kreidl, Sonja (2004). Representationalism and beyond: A phenomenological critique of Thomas Metzinger's self-model theory. Journal of Consciousness Studies 11 (10-11):88-108.   (Google) 
 
Robinson, William S. (1998). Intrinsic qualities of experience: Surviving Harman's critique. Erkenntnis 47 (3):285-309.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Gilbert Harman (1990) seeks to defend psychophysical functionalism by articulating a representationalist view of the qualities of experience. The negative side of the present paper argues that the resources of this representationalist view are insufficient to ground the evident distinction between perception and (mere) thought. This failure makes the view unable to support the uses to which Harman wishes to put it. Several rescuing moves by other representationalists are considered, but none is found successful. Part of the difficulty in Harman's (...) work is that he does not adequately specify the view he rejects. The positive aim of the present paper is to provide a robust intrinsic quality account of experience that offers advantages in comparison with Harman's view, and that plainly does not fall to any of the arguments he advances






 
Ryder, Dan (ms). The autonomic nervous system and Dretske on phenomenal consciousness.   (Google | More links) 




 
Schroer, Robert (2009). Does the Phenomenality of Perceptual Experience Present an Obstacle to Phenomenal Externalism? Philosophical Papers 39 (1):93-110.   (Google)
Abstract: : Although Externalism is widely accepted as a thesis about belief, as a thesis about experience it is both controversial and unpopular. One potential explanation of this difference involves the phenomenality of perceptual experience—perhaps there is something about how perceptual experiences seem that straightforwardly speaks against Externalist accounts of their individuation conditions. In this paper, I investigate this idea by exploring the role that the phenomenality of color experience plays in a prominent argument against Phenomenal Externalism: Ned Block’s Inverted Earth Argument. In the course of carrying out this investigation, I will show that challenging Phenomenal Externalism on phenomenological grounds is not as straightforward a task as it is commonly assumed to be. 
 
Schroer, Robert (2004). Environmental representationalists on afterimages and phosphenes: Putting our best foot forward. Southern Journal of Philosophy 42 (4):531-546.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: Environmental representationalism is the position that phenomenal differences between visual experiences are determined by the representational claims those experiences make about the surrounding environment. Afterimage and phosphene experiences are an important and widely cited objection to this position. In this paper, I defend environmental representationalism from this objection. In particular, I point out several ways in which typical environmental representationalist accounts of these experiences are lacking while developing a more satisfying account which focuses on how the visual system generates its representations as well as on several of the unique temporally-extended features of afterimage/phosphene experiences.
 
Schroer, Robert (2002). Matching sensible qualities: A skeleton in the closet for representationalism. Philosophical Studies 107 (3):259-73.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The intransitivity of matching sensible qualities of color is a threat not only to the sense-data theory, but to all realist theories of sensible qualities, including the current leading realist theory: representationalism. I save representationalism from this threat by way of a novel yet empirically plausible hypothesis about the introspective classification of sensible qualities of color. I argue that due to limitations of the visual system's ability to extract fine-grained information about color from the environment, introspective classification of sensible qualities of color is sensitive to features of context. I finish by arguing for the superiority of my solution over two alternative solutions: one by Nelson Goodman, the other by C.L. Hardin.







 
Schroer, Robert (2002). Seeing it all clearly: The real story on blurry vision. American Philosophical Quarterly 39 (3):297-301.   (Google)
Abstract: Representationalism is the position that the phenomenal character of a perceptual experience supervenes upon its representational content. The phenomenon of blurry vision is thought to raise a difficulty for this position. More specifically, it is alleged that representationalists cannot account for the phenomenal difference between clearly seeing an indistinct edge and blurrily seeing a distinct edge solely in terms of represented features of the surrounding environment. I defend representationalism from this objection by offering a novel account of the phenomenal difference between these two kinds of cases.
 
Schellenberg, Susanna (2010). The Particularity and Phenomenology of Perceptual Experience. Philosophical Studies 149 (1).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: I argue that any account of perceptual experience should satisfy the following two desiderata. First, it should account for the particularity of perceptual experience, that is, it should account for the mind-independent object of an experience making a difference to individuating the experience. Second, it should explain the possibility that perceptual relations to distinct environments could yield subjectively indistinguishable experiences. Relational views of perceptual experience can easily satisfy the first but not the second desideratum. Representational views can easily satisfy the second but not the first desideratum. I argue that to satisfy both desiderata perceptual experience is best conceived of as fundamentally both relational and representational. I develop a view of perceptual experience that synthesizes the virtues of relationalism and representationalism, by arguing that perceptual content is constituted by potentially gappy de re modes of presentation.






 
Scott, Michael (2007). Distinguishing the senses. Philosophical Explorations 10 (3):257 – 262.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Seeing, hearing and touching are phenomenally different, even if we are detecting the same spatial properties with each sense. This presents a prima facie problem for intentionalism, the theory that phenomenal character supervenes on representational content. The paper reviews some attempts to resolve this problem, and then looks in detail at Peter Carruthers' recent proposal that the senses can be individuated by the way in which they represent spatial properties and incorporate time. This proposal is shown to be ineffective in distinguishing auditory from either visual or tactual perception, and substantial classes of visual and tactual perceptions are found that the posited spatial and temporal features fail to individuate





 
Seager, William E. (1997). Critical notice of Fred Dretske's Naturalizing the Mind. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 27 (1):83-109.   (Google) 
 
Seager, William E. & Bourget, David (2007). Representationalism about consciousness. In Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Google)
Abstract: A representationalist-friendly introduction to representationalism which covers a number of central problems and objections.
 
Seager, William E. (1999). Representational theories of consciousness, parts I and II. In William E. Seager (ed.), Theories of Consciousness: An Introduction and Assessment. Routledge.   (Google) 
 
Seager, William E. (online). Some awkwardness in poised content?   (Google) 
 
Seager, William E. (2003). Tye on consciousness: Time to panic? Philosophical Studies 113 (3):237-247.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 




 
Shoemaker, Sydney (ms). Content, color, and character I: Against standard representationalism.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Shoemaker, Sydney (ms). Content, color, and character II: A better sort of representationalism.   (Google) 
 
Shoemaker, Sydney, Content, character and color I: Against standard representationalism.   (Google)
Abstract: The words “content” and “character” in my title refer to the representational content and phenomenal character of color experiences. So my topic concerns the nature of our experience of color. But I will, of course, be talking about colors as well as color experience. Let me set the stage by mentioning some things, some more controversial than others, that I will be taking for granted. I assume, to begin with, that objects in the world have colors, and have them independently of being perceived to have them, and independently even of there being creatures capable of perceiving them. I think, and this of course sets me apart from the many color irrealists among philosophers and color scientists, that any reasonable semantics for color terms, and any reasonable account of the reference of color concepts, should yield the result that colors are properties of external things that are realized in certain of their physical properties, namely those responsible for their reflecting or emitting the light whose impact on our retinas is involved in causing our color perceptions. This brings me to a further assumption that I shall be making, namely the truth of physicalism. I take physicalism to be the thesis that all properties of things either are or are realized in basic physical properties, where basic physical properties are the properties that underlie the behavior and causal powers of inanimate things. There are two ways in which the commitment to physicalism will figure in my discussion. First, I assume that colors are physically realized properties. Second, I assume that color experiences are physically realized. These two commitments frame the problem I am discussing – how can colors be properties realized in the microphysical properties of things, and how can color experience be so realized? I don’t think there is any generally accepted account of what it is for a property to be “realized in” other properties. For those who think, as I do, that properties are individuated by their causal features, it should seem plausible to say that property P realizes property Q just in case the forward looking causal features of Q are a subset of the forward looking causal features of P, and the backward looking....
 
Shoemaker, Sydney, Content, character, and color II: A better kind of representationalism.   (Google)
Abstract: From now on I will assume that it is possible in principle for there to be cases of spectrum inversion in which the invertees are equally good perceivers of the colors. What I want to show next is that while allowing this possibility is incompatible with standard representationalism, it requires acceptance of a different version of representationalism. Consider the standard way of describing a case of spectrum inversion. Returning to Jack and Jill, we say that red things look to Jack the way green things look to Jill, blue things look to Jack the way yellow things look to Jill, and so on. Of course, we might also express this by saying that the phenomenal character of Jack’s experience of red things is like the phenomenal character of Jill’s experience of green things, and so on. Or by saying that “what it is like” for Jack to see red things is “what it is like” for Jill to see green things, and so on. But “phenomenal character” is philosophical jargon, and “what it is like” is on its way to being that. We need to be able cash these locutions in terms that we are sure we understand. And I think that the best way of doing that is in terms of how things look. Now the sense in which red things look different to Jack and Jill cannot be that they look to have different colors in the epistemic sense. We can suppose that both perceive red things as being red, and therefore that to both red things look red in the epistemic sense. Nor can it be the comparative sense – to each, we can suppose, red things look like standard red things under standard conditions. The remaining sense of “looks” is supposed to be the phenomenal sense. Now those who employ this notion typically speak of things as looking red, blue, yellow, etc., in the phenomenal sense. But if Jack and Jill are both accurate perceivers of the colors of things, it can’t be that the difference in how things look to them is a difference in what colors things look to them, even if “looks” is used in the phenomenal sense..
 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1991). Qualia and consciousness. Mind 100 (399):507-24.   (Cited by 27 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1998). Two cheers for representationalism. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 58 (3):671-678.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 




 
Soldati, Gianfranco, Intentionalism and phenomenal error.   (Google)
Abstract: In this paper we shall address some issues concerning the relation between the content and the nature of perceptual experience. More precisely, we shall ask whether the claim that perceptual experiences are by nature relational implies that they cannot be intentional. As we shall see, much depends in this respect on the way one understands the possibility for one to be wrong about the phenomenal nature of one’s own experience. We shall argue that once this very possibility is properly understood, the metaphysical claim that perceptual experiences are relational is compatible with the view that they are intentional. Before presenting the argument, we should try to articulate some elements of an intentionalist approach concerning the role of experience in our relation to ourselves and to our environment. The picture should offer a motivation for the arguments that follow. more about illusions etc (see Clatilde’s comments)
 
Dorsch, Fabian & Soldati, Gianfranco, Intentionalism, experiential and phenomenal error.   (Google)
Abstract: In this paper we shall address some issues concerning the relation between the content and the nature of perceptual experiences. More precisely, we shall ask whether the claim that perceptual experiences are by nature relational implies that they cannot be intentional. As we shall see, much depends in this respect on the way one understands the possibility for one to be wrong about the phenomenal nature of one’s own experience. We shall describe and distinguish a series of errors that can occur in our introspective access to our perceptual experiences. We shall argue that once the nature of these different kinds of error are properly understood, the metaphysical claim that perceptual experiences are relational can be seen to be compatible with the view that they are intentional. Before presenting the argument, we should try to articulate some elements of an intentionalist approach concerning the role of experience in our relation to ourselves and to our environment. The picture should offer a motivation for the arguments that follow
 
Speaks, Jeff (2010). Attention and intentionalism. Philosophical Quarterly 60 (239):325-342.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Many alleged counter-examples to intentionalism, the thesis that the phenomenology of perceptual experiences of a given sense modality supervenes on the contents of experiences of that modality, can be avoided by adopting a liberal view of the sorts of properties that can be represented in perceptual experience. I argue that there is a class of counter-examples to intentionalism, based on shifts in attention, which avoids this response. A necessary connection between the contents and phenomenal characters of perceptual experiences can be preserved by distinguishing perceptual phenomenology from the phenomenology of attention; but even if this distinction is viable, these cases put pressure on the thesis that phenomenal character can, in general, be explained in terms of mental representation





 
Speaks, Jeff (forthcoming). Spectrum inversion without a difference in representation is impossible. Philosophical Studies.   (Google)
Abstract: Even if spectrum inversion of various sorts is possible, spectrum inversion without a difference in representation is not. So spectrum inversion does not pose a challenge for the intentionalist thesis that, necessarily, within a given sense modality, if two experiences are alike with respect to content, they are also alike with respect to their phenomenal character. On the contrary, reflection on variants of standard cases of spectrum inversion provides a strong argument for intentionalism. Depending on one's views about the possibility of various other sorts of spectrum inversion, the impossibility of spectrum inversion without difference in representation can also be used as an argument against a wide variety of reductive theories of mental representation.
 
Speaks, Jeff (2009). Transparency, intentionalism, and the nature of perceptual content. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 79 (3):539-573.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: I argue that the transparency of experience provides the basis of arguments both for intentionalism -- understood as the view that there is a necessary connection between perceptual content and perceptual phenomenology -- and for the view that the contents of perceptual experiences are Russellian propositions. While each of these views is popular, there are apparent tensions between them, and some have thought that their combination is unstable. In the second half of the paper, I respond to these worries by arguing that Russellianism is consistent with intentionalism, that their conjunction is consistent with both internalism about phenomenology and externalism about perceptual content, and that the resulting view receives independent support from the relationship between hallucination and thought.





 
Stalnaker, Robert (1996). On a defense of the hegemony of representation. Philosophical Issues 7:101-108.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 





 
Stecker, Robert A. (2006). Moderate actual intentionalism defended. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 64 (4):429-438.   (Google | More links) 





 
Stoljar, Daniel (2007). Consequences of intentionalism. Erkenntnis (Special Issue) 66 (1-2):247--70.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Most of the recent discussion in philosophy of mind concerning intentionalism






 
Stoljar, Daniel (2004). The argument from diaphanousness. In M. Escurdia, Robert J. Stainton & Christopher D. Viger (eds.), Language, Mind and World: Special Issue of the Canadian Journal of Philosophy. University of Alberta Press.   (Cited by 13 | Google)
Abstract: 1. Introduction In ‘The Refutation of Idealism’, G.E.Moore observed that, "when we try to introspect the sensation of blue, all we can see is the blue: the other element is as if it were diaphanous" (1922; p.25). Many philosophers, but Gilbert Harman (1990, 1996) in particular, have suggested that this observation forms the basis of an argument against qualia, usually called the argument from diaphanousness or transparency.1 But even its friends concede that it is none too clear what the argument from diaphanousness—as I will call it—is (Tye 2000; p.45).2 The purpose of this paper is to formulate the argument, and to assess its merits. My conclusion will be that qualia realists have little to fear from the argument—provided both qualia and diaphanousness are properly understood
 
Stoljar, Daniel (1996). What what it's like isn't like. Analysis 56 (4):281-83.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Switankowsky, Irene (1999). Dretske on naturalizing experience. Dialogue 38 (3):561-566.   (Google) 
 
Thompson, Brad J. (2006). Color constancy and Russellian representationalism. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 84 (1):75-94.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Representationalism, the view that phenomenal character supervenes on intentional content, has attracted a wide following in recent years. Most representationalists have also endorsed what I call 'standard Russellianism'. According to standard Russellianism, phenomenal content is Russellian in nature, and the properties represented by perceptual experiences are mind-independent physical properties. I argue that standard Russellianism conflicts with the everyday experience of colour constancy. Due to colour constancy, standard Russellianism is unable to simultaneously give a proper account of the phenomenal content of colour experience and do justice to its phenomenology










 
Thomas, Nigel, Consciousness, color, and content.   (Google)
Abstract: For some reason I never received the printer's proofs for this review before it was published. As a consequence, several typographical errors occur in the version published in Minds and Machines , and one of them is serious. Several lines of my original text (about 140 words) were lost from one paragraph. What is worse, it appears that the paragraph was then copy edited so that it is no longer obvious that text is missing, except for the fact that the argument no longer makes any sense! In this online version, text, punctuation etc. that I have found to be missing or incorrectly printed in the published version appears in..
 
Thompson, Brad J. (2008). Representationalism and the conceivability of inverted spectra. Synthese 160 (2):203-213.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Most philosophers who have endorsed the idea that there is such a thing as phenomenal content—content that supervenes on phenomenal character—have also endorsed what I call Standard Russellianism. According to Standard Russellianism, phenomenal content is Russellian in nature, and the properties represented by perceptual experiences are mind-independent physical properties. In agreement with Sydney Shoemaker [Shoemaker, S. (1994). Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 54 249–314], I argue that Standard Russellianism is incompatible with the possibility of spectrum inversion without illusion. One defense of (...) Standard Russellianism is to hold that spectrum inversion without illusion is conceivable but not in fact possible. I argue that this response fails. As a consequence, either phenomenal content is not Russellian, or experiences do not represent mind-independent physical properties






 
Thomas, Nigel J. T. (2003). Michael Tye, consciousness, color, and content, representation and mind series, cambridge, ma/london: A Bradford book, MIT press, 2000, XIII + 198 pp., $29.95 (cloth), ISBN 0-262-20129-. Minds and Machines 13 (3).   (Google) 
 
Thomasson, Amie (2008). Phenomenal consciousness and the phenomenal world. Monist 91 (2).   (Google)
Abstract: One-level accounts of consciousness have become increasingly popular (Dretske 1995, Tye 1995, Siewert 1998, Thomasson 2000 and 2005, Lurz 2006, McGinn, this volume). By a ‘onelevel’ account I mean an account according to which consciousness is fundamentally a matter of awareness of a world —and does not require awareness of our own minds, mental states, or the phenomenal character of these. As Fred Dretske puts it “Experiences and beliefs are conscious, not because you are conscious of them, but because, so to speak, you are conscious with them”
 
Thompson, Brad J. (2008). Representationalism and the argument from hallucination. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 89 (3):384-412.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Phenomenal character is determined by representational content, which both hallucinatory and veridical experiences can share. But in the case of veridical experience, unlike hallucination, the external objects of experience literally have the properties one is aware of in experience. The representationalist can accept the common factor assumption without having to introduce sensory intermediaries between the mind and the world, thus securing a form of direct realism





 
Thompson, Evan (2008). Representationalism and the phenomenology of mental imagery. Synthese 160 (3):203--213.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper sketches a phenomenological analysis of visual mental imagery and uses it to criticize representationalism and the internalist-versus-externalist framework for understanding consciousness. Contrary to internalist views of mental imagery imagery experience is not the experience of a phenomenal mental picture inspected by the mind’s eye, but rather the mental simulation of perceptual experience. Furthermore, there are experiential differences in perceiving and imagining that are not differences in the properties represented by these experiences. Therefore, externalist representationalism, which maintains that the properties of experience are the external properties represented by experience, is an inadequate account of conscious experience





 
Thompson, Brad J. (2007). Shoemaker on phenomenal content. Philosophical Studies 135 (3):307--334.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In a series of papers and lectures, Sydney Shoemaker has developed a sophisticated Russellian theory of phenomenal content (1994, 2000, 2001, 2003). It has as its central motivation two considerations. One is the possibility of spectrum-inversion without illusion. The other is the transparency of experience







 
Thompson, Brad (2003). The Nature of Phenomenal Content. Dissertation, University of Arizona   (Google) 
 
Thompson, Brad J. (2010). The spatial content of experience. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 81 (1):146-184.   (Google | More links) 




 
Tye, Michael (2005). Another look at representationalism and pain. In Murat Aydede (ed.), Pain: New Essays on its Nature and the Methodology of its Study. MIT Press.   (Cited by 7 | Google) 
 
Tye, Michael (1995). A representational theory of pains and their phenomenal character. Philosophical Perspectives 9:223-39.   (Cited by 30 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Tye, Michael (2003). Blurry images, double vision, and other oddities: New problems for representationalism? In Quentin Smith & Aleksandar Jokic (eds.), Consciousness: New Philosophical Perspectives. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Tye, Michael (2003). Consciousness, color, and content. Philosophical Studies 113 (3).   (Google) 
 
Tye, Michael (2005). In defense of representationalism: Reply to commentaries. In Murat Aydede (ed.), Pain: New Essays on Its Nature and the Methodology of Its Study. Cambridge MA: Bradford Book/MIT Press.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Tye, Michael (1998). Inverted earth, swampman, and representationalism. Philosophical Perspectives 12:459-78.   (Google) 
 
Tye, Michael (1996). Orgasms again. Philosophical Issues 7:51-54.   (Google | More links) 





 
Tye, Michael (2003). On the virtue of being poised: Reply to Seager. Philosophical Studies 113 (3):275-280.   (Google | More links) 




 
Tye, Michael (online). Phenomenal character and color - reply to Maund.   (Google | More links) 





 
Tye, Michael (1996). Perceptual experience is a many-layered thing. Philosophical Issues 7:117-126.   (Cited by 8 | Google | More links) 





 
Tye, Michael (1998). Pr. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 58 (3):649-656.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 




 
Tye, Michael (online). Precis of Color, Content, and Consciousness.   (Google) 
 
Tye, Michael (1993). Qualia, content, and the inverted spectrum. Noûs 27 (2):159-183.   (Cited by 21 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Tye, Michael (2002). Representationalism and the transparency of experience. Noûs 36 (1):137-51.   (Cited by 21 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Representationalism is a thesis about the phenomenal character of experiences, about their immediate subjective ‘feel’.1 At a minimum, the thesis is one of supervenience: necessarily, experiences that are alike in their representational contents are alike in their phenomenal character. So understood, the thesis is silent on the nature of phenomenal character. Strong or pure representationalism goes further. It aims to tell us what phenomenal character is. According to the theory developed in Tye 1995, phenomenal character is one and the same as representational content that meets certain further conditions. One very important motivation for this theory is the so-called ? transparency of experience.? The purpose of this paper is to elucidate the appeal to transparency more carefully than has been done hithertofore, to make some remarks about the introspective awareness of experience in light of this appeal, and to consider one problem case for transparency at some length, that of blurry vision. Along the way, I shall also address some of the remarks Stephen Leeds makes in his essay on transparency





 
Tye, Michael (1998). Reply to Block, Jackson, and Shoemaker on Ten Problems of Consciousness. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 58 (3).   (Google) 
 
Tye, Michael (1998). Response to discussants. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 58 (3):679-687.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 




 
Tye, Michael (forthcoming). Representationalist theories of consciousness. In Ansgar Beckermann & Brian P. McLaughlin (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Mind. Oxford University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: This essay surveys representationalist theories of phenomenal consciousness as well as the major arguments for them. It also takes up two major objections. The essay is divided into five sections. Section I offers some introductory remarks on phenomenal consciousness. Section II presents the classic view of phenomenal consciousness to which representationalists are opposed. Section III canvasses various versions of representationalism about consciousness. Section IV lays out the main arguments for the representationalist stance. The final section addresses the two objections
 
Tye, Michael (ms). The experience of emotion: An intentionalist theory.   (Google)
Abstract: The experience of emotion is a fundamental part of human consciousness. Think, for example, of how different our conscious lives would be without such experiences as joy, anger, fear, disgust, pity, anxiety, and embarrassment. It is uncontroversial that these experiences typically have an intentional content. Anger, for example, is normally directed at someone or something. One may feel angry at one=s stock broker for provid- ing bad advice or angry with the cleaning lady for dropping the vase. But it is not un- controversial that emotional experiences are always intentional. John Searle, for exam- ple, remarks, AMany conscious states are not Intentional, e.g., a sudden sense of elation . . .@ (1983, p. 2). Moreover, many animals experience emotions and it is natural to sup- pose that such emotions lack the sophistication of beliefs or thoughts. When a dog ex- periences delight in seeing its master after an absence of several days, the suggestion that at least part of the dog=s experience of delight is a belief (or thought) that its master has returned home seems to import into the experience something that at best is associ- ated with it and perhaps is not really a state to which the dog is subject at all. And even in the case of human beings, emotional experience often does not seem to involve thought. Consider the experience of disgust, to take one obvious example.1 Nor is a sali- ent belief required. One may have a strong fear of spiders and yet not believe that spi- ders typically pose any risk to humans. But if emotional experiences need not involve beliefs or thoughts, then just how are they intentional?2..
 
Tye, Michael (1995). Ten Problems of Consciousness: A Representational Theory of the Phenomenal Mind. MIT Press.   (Cited by 538 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Tye's book develops a persuasive and, in many respects, original argument for the view that the qualitative side of our mental life is representational in...






 
Tye, Michael (online). To PANIC or not to PANIC? -Reply to Byrne.   (Google) 
 
Tye, Michael (2003). The PANIC theory: Reply to Byrne. Philosophical Studies 113 (3):287-290.   (Google | More links) 




 
Tye, Michael (2002). Visual qualia and visual content revisited. In David J. Chalmers (ed.), Philosophy of Mind: Classical and Contemporary Readings. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 8 | Google)
Abstract: Experiences vary widely. For example, I run my fingers over sandpaper, smell a skunk, feel a sharp pain in my finger, seem to see bright purple, become extremely angry. In each of these cases, I am the subject of a mental state with a very distinctive subjective character. There is something it is _like_ for me to undergo each state, some phenomenology that it has. Philoso- phers often use the term 'qualia' to refer to the introspectively accessible properties of experiences that characterize what it is like to have them. In this standard, broad sense of the term, it is very difficult to deny that there are qualia. There is another, more restricted use of the term
 
Tye, Michael (1992). Visual qualia and visual content. In Tim Crane (ed.), The Contents of Experience. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 39 | Google) 
 
Tye, Michael (1994). What what it's like is really like. Analyst 1 (4).   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Tye, Michael (1995). What "what it is like" is like. Analysis 55.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Tye, Michael (2007). Intentionalism and the argument from no common content. Philosophical Perspectives 21:589-613.   (Google)
Abstract: Disjunctivists (Hinton 1973, Snowdon 1990, Martin 2002, 2006) often motivate their approach to perceptual experience by appealing in part to the claim that in cases of veridical perception, the subject is directly in contact with the perceived object. When I perceive a table, for example, there is no table-like sense-impression that stands as an intermediary between the table and me. Nor am I related to the table as I am to a deer when I see its footprint in the snow. I do not experience the table by experiencing some- thing else over and above the table and its facing surface. I see the facing surface of the table directly
 
Vinueza, Adam (2000). Sensations and the language of thought. Philosophical Psychology 13 (3):373-392.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links)
Abstract: I discuss two forms of the thesis that to have a sensation is to token a sentence in a language of thought-what I call, following Georges Rey, the sensational sentences thesis. One form of the thesis is a version of standard functionalism, while the other is a version of the increasingly popular thesis that for a sensation to have qualia is for it to have a certain kind of intentional content-that is, intentionalism. I defend the basic idea behind the sensational sentences thesis, and argue that the intentionalist version is either false or collapses into the standard functionalist thesis







 
Wager, A. (1999). The extra qualia problem: Synaesthesia and representationism. Philosophical Psychology 12 (3):263-281.   (Cited by 9 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Representationism is the view that the phenomenal character of an experience supervenes on its representational content. Synaesthesia is a condition in which the phenomenal character of the experience produced in a subject by stimulation of one sensory modality contains elements characteristic of a second, unstimulated sensory modality. After reviewing some of the recent psychological literature on synaesthesia and one of the leading versions of representationism, I argue that cases of synaesthesia, as instances of what I call the extra qualia problem, are counterexamples to externalist versions of representationism






 
Warfield, Ted A. (1999). Against representational theories of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 6 (1):66-69.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Wright, Edmond L. (1990). New representationalism. Journal for the Theory of Social Behavior 20 (1):65-92.   (Cited by 12 | Google | More links) 




 
Wright, Edmond L. (ed.) (1993). New Representationalisms: Essays in the Philosophy of Perception. Ashgate.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Wright, Wayne (2003). Projectivist representationalism and color. Philosophical Psychology 16 (4):515-529.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper proposes a subjectivist approach to color within the framework of an externalist form of representationalism about phenomenal consciousness. Motivations are presented for accepting both representationalism and color subjectivism, and an argument is offered against the case made by Michael Tye on behalf of the claim that colors are objective, physical properties of objects. In the face of the considerable difficulties associated with finding a workable realist theory of color, the alternative account of color experience set out, projectivist representationalism, claims that the color properties we encounter in experience exist only in the representational contents of our experiences. Color experiences are caused by the physical structure of objects, but objects are never actually colored and color experiences systematically misrepresent objects as colored. However, despite being an error theory of color, projectivist representationalism does not do violence to our everyday use and understanding of color concepts and terms, nor does it undermine the role of color experience in aiding the perceiving subject in navigating through the world









 
Wright, Wayne (online). Transparency and aspects.   (Google)
Abstract: Strong Representationalism (SR) claims that the phenomenal character of experience is a certain kind of representational content. Furthermore, SR theorists often maintain that the phenomenal qualities of experience just are properties of the objects of experience, represented in experience.1 Another claim held by SR theorists, often cited as a reason for embracing their view, is that experience is transparent. Transparency is the phenomenon of introspection of your experience revealing nothing but the objects, properties, and relations that your experience is an experience of. In this note, I will raise a problem for SR based on its apparent difficulty in accounting for representation under an aspect at the level of phenomenal appearances. I will then discuss and briefly criticize Michael Tye’s proposed response to this sort of concern. I conclude by offering my own reply to the problem. What follows focuses on pain experience, but there is no barrier to extending these comments to certain other forms of experience, both sensory and perceptual
 
Wright, Wayne (online). Tye, tree-rings, and representation.   (Google)
Abstract: In a recent book, [1] Michael Tye has offered a representational theory of phenomenal consciousness. As Tye himself admits, part of his account involves arguing for a position which has traditionally received little support; he contends that _all_ experiences and feelings have representational
 
Wu, Wayne (forthcoming). What is Conscious Attention? Philosophy and Phenomenological Research.   (Google)
Abstract: Perceptual attention is essential to both thought and agency, for there is arguably no demonstrative thought or bodily action without it. Psychologists and philosophers since William James have taken attention to be a ubiquitous and distinctive form of consciousness, one that leaves a characteristic mark on perceptual experience. As a process of selecting specific perceptual inputs, attention influences the way things perceptually appear. It may then seem that it is a specific feature of perceptual representation that constitutes what it is like to consciously attend to an object. In fact conscious attention is more complicated. In what follows, I argue that the phenomenology of conscious attention to what is perceived involves not just a way of perceptually locking on to a specific object. It necessarily involves a way of cognitively locking on to it as well.
 
Zahavi, Dan & Parnas, Josef (2002). Phenomenal consciousness and self-awareness: A phenomenological critique of representational theory. In Shaun Gallagher & Jonathan Shear (eds.), Models of the Self. Thorverton UK: Imprint Academic.   (Cited by 35 | Google) 
 
1.5c Phenomenal Intentionality




Albertazzi, Liliana (2007). At the roots of consciousness: Intentional presentations. Journal of Consciousness Studies 14 (1):94-114.   (Google)
Abstract: The Author argues for a non-semantic theory of intentionality, i.e. a theory of intentional reference rooted in the perceptive world. Specifically, the paper concerns two aspects of the original theory of intentionality: the structure of intentional objects as appearance (an unfolding spatio-temporal structure endowed with a direction), and the cognitive processes involved in a psychic act at the primary level of cognition. Examples are given from the experimental psychology of vision, with a particular emphasis on the relation between phenomenal space and colour appearances
 
Richards, T. Brad & Bailey, Andrew R., Phenomenology and intentionality.   (Google)
Abstract: Horgan and Tienson (2002) argue that some intentional content is constitutively determined by phenomenology alone. We argue that this would require a certain kind of covariation of phenomenal states and intentional states which is not established by Horgan and Tienson’s arguments. We make the case that there is inadequate reason to think phenomenology determines perceptual belief, and that there is reason to doubt that phenomenology determines any species of non-perceptual intentionality. We also raise worries about the capacity of phenomenology to map onto intentionality in a way that would be appropriate for any determiner of content / fixer of truth conditions
 
Brandl, Johannes (2009). Intentionality, Information, and Experience. In A. Hieke & H. Leitgeb (eds.), Reduction: Between the Mind and the Brain. Ontos Verlag.   (Google) 
 
Braddock, Glenn (2003). The first-person approach and the nature of consciousness. Charles Siewert, the significance of consciousness. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 2 (2).   (Google) 
 
Burge, Tyler (2003). Phenomenality and reference: Reply to Loar. In Martin Hahn & B. Ramberg (eds.), Reflections and Replies: Essays on the Philosophy of Tyler Burge. MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
Farkas, Katalin (2008). Phenomenal intentionality without compromise. The Monist 91 (2):273-93.   (Google)
Abstract: In recent years, several philosophers have defended the idea of phenomenal intentionality: the intrinsic directedness of certain conscious mental events which is inseparable from these events’ phenomenal character. On this conception, phenomenology is usually conceived as narrow, that is, as supervening on the internal states of subjects, and hence phenomenal intentionality is a form of narrow intentionality. However, defenders of this idea usually maintain that there is another kind of, externalistic intentionality, which depends on factors external to the subject. We may ask whether this concession to content externalism is obligatory. In this paper, I shall argue that it isn’t. I shall suggest that if one is convinced that narrow phenomenal intentionality is legitimate, there is nothing stopping one from claiming that all intentionality is narrow.
 
Fox, Ivan (1989). On the nature and cognitive function of phenomenal content -- part one. Philosophical Topics 17 (1):81-103.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Georgalis, Nicholas (2003). The fiction of phenomenal intentionality. Consciousness and Emotion 4 (2):243-256.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper argues that there is no such thing as ?phenomenal intentionality?. The arguments used by its advocates rely upon an appeal to ?what it is like? (WIL) to attend on some occasion to one?s intentional state. I argue that there is an important asymmetry in the application of the WIL phenomenon to sensory and intentional states. Advocates of ?phenomenal intentionality? fail to recognize this, but this asymmetry undermines their arguments for phenomenal intentionality. The broader issue driving the advocacy of phenomenal intentionality is the belief that consciousness must somehow be implicated in intentionality. With this I agree. But because of the asymmetry of application of WIL, the path chosen by advocates of phenomenal intentionality to secure this conclusion cannot succeed. A brief overview of recent philosophy of mind explains the temptation to take this wrong path. Fortunately, there are other routes that implicate consciousness in intentionality. In consequence, though there is no phenomenal intentionality, there is a phenomenology of intentionality





 
Gertler, Brie (2001). The relationship between phenomenality and intentionality. Psyche 7 (17).   (Google)
Abstract: Charles Siewert offers a persuasive argument to show that the presence of certain phenomenal features logically suffices for the presence of certain intentional ones. He claims that this shows that (some) phenomenal features are inherently intentional. I argue that he has not established the latter thesis, even if we grant the logical sufficiency claim. For he has not ruled out a rival alternative interpretation of the relevant data, namely, that (some) intentional features are inherently phenomenal
 
Graham, George; Horgan, Terence E. & Tienson, John L. (2007). Consciousness and intentionality. In Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Horgan, Terence E.; Tienson, John L. & Graham, George (2004). Phenomenal intentionality and the brain in a vat. In Richard Schantz (ed.), The Externalist Challenge. Walter de Gruyter.   (Cited by 12 | Google) 
 
Horgan, Terence M. & Kriegel, Uriah (2008). Phenomenal intentionality meets the extended mind. The Monist 91:347-373.   (Google) 
 
Horgan, Terence E. & Tienson, John L. (2002). The intentionality of phenomenology and the phenomenology of intentionality. In David J. Chalmers (ed.), Philosophy of Mind: Classical and Contemporary Readings. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 52 | Google) 
 
Kriegel, Uriah (forthcoming). Cognitive Phenomenology as the Basis of Unconscious Content. In T. Bayne & M. Montague (eds.), Cognitive Phenomenology. Oxford University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: Since the seventies, it has been customary to assume that intentionality is independent of consciousness. Recently, a number of philosophers have rejected this assumption, claiming intentionality is closely tied to consciousness, inasmuch as non- conscious intentionality in some sense depends upon conscious intentionality. Within this alternative framework, the question arises of how to account for unconscious intentionality, and different authors have offered different accounts. In this paper, I compare and contrast four possible accounts of unconscious intentionality, which I call potentialism, inferentialism, eliminativism, and interpretivism. The first three are the leading accounts in the existing literature, while the fourth is my own proposal, which I argue to be superior. I then argue that an upshot of interpretivism is that all unconscious intentionality is ultimately grounded is a specific kind of cognitive phenomenology.
 
Kriegel, Uriah (2010). Intentionality and Normativity. Philosophical Issues 20.   (Google)
Abstract: One of the most enduring elements of Davidson’s legacy is the idea that intentionality is inherently normative. The normativity of intentionality means different things to different people and in different contexts, however. A subsidiary goal of this paper is to get clear on the sense in which Davidson means the thesis that intentionality is inherently normative. The central goal of the paper is to consider whether the thesis is true, in light of recent work on intentionality that insists on an intimate connection between intentionality and phenomenal consciousness. According to several recent authors, there is a kind of intentionality – “phenomenal intentionality” – that is fully constituted by the phenomenal character of conscious experiences. I will argue that although Davidson’s thesis, when correctly understood, is compelling for most intentionality, it is false of phenomenal intentionality. I start, in §1, with an explication of the notion of phenomenal intentionality; in §2, I elucidate Davidson’s thesis and his case for it; in §3, I argue that the case does not extend to phenomenal intentionality; I close, in §4, with some objections and replies.
 
Kriegel, Uriah (2007). Intentional inexistence and phenomenal intentionality. Philosophical Perspectives 21 (1):307-340.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: How come we can represent Bigfoot even though Bigfoot does not exist, given that representing something involves bearing a relation to it and we cannot bear relations to what does not exist?This is the problem of intentional inexistence. This paper develops a two-step solution to this problem, involving (first) an adverbial account of conscious representation, or phenomenal inten- tionality, and (second) the thesis that all representation derives from conscious representation (all intentionality derives from phenomenal intentionality). The solution is correspondingly two-part: we can consciously represent Bigfoot because consciously representing Bigfoot does not involve bearing a relation to Bigfoot, but rather instantiating a certain non-relational (“adverbial”) property of representing Bigfoot-wise; and we can non-consciously represent Bigfoot because non-consciously representing Bigfoot does not involve bearing a relation to Bigfoot, but rather bearing a relation to conscious representations of Bigfoot





 
Kriegel, Uriah (2003). Is intentionality dependent upon consciousness? Philosophical Studies 116 (3):271-307.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links)
Abstract: It is often assumed thatconsciousness and intentionality are twomutually independent aspects of mental life.When the assumption is denounced, it usuallygives way to the claim that consciousness issomehow dependent upon intentionality. Thepossibility that intentionality may bedependent upon consciousness is rarelyentertained. Recently, however, John Searle andColin McGinn have argued for just suchdependence. In this paper, I reconstruct andevaluate their argumentation. I am in sympathyboth with their view and with the lines ofargument they employ in its defense. UnlikeSearle and McGinn, however, I am quite attachedto a naturalist approach to intentionality. Itwill turn out to be somewhat difficult toreconcile naturalism with the notion thatintentionality is dependent upon consciousness,although, perhaps surprisingly, I will arguethat McGinn's case for such dependence iscompatible with naturalism










 
Kriegel, Uriah (2002). Phenomenal content. Erkenntnis 57 (2):175-198.   (Cited by 12 | Google | More links) 








 
Kriegel, Uriah (2008). The dispensability of (merely) intentional objects. Philosophical Studies 141 (1):79-95.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The ontology of (merely) intentional objects is a can of worms. If we can avoid ontological commitment to such entities, we should. In this paper, I offer a strategy for accomplishing that. This is to reject the traditional act-object account of intentionality in favor of an adverbial account. According to adverbialism about intentionality, having a dragon thought is not a matter of bearing the thinking-about relation to dragons, but of engaging in the activity of thinking dragon-wise





 
Kriegel, Uriah (ms). The intentionality of conscious experience and mind-relative content.   (Google)
Abstract: This is a paper I wrote at the end of my first year in grad school. I'm not sure why it's online and don't remember what I say in it. Just thought I'd mention...
 
Kriegel, Uriah & Horgan, Terry (forthcoming). The Phenomenal Intentionality Research Program. In T. Horgan & U. Kriegel (eds.), Phenomenal Intentionality: New Essays. Oxford University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: We review some of the work already done around the notion of phenomenal intentionality and propose a way of turning this body of work into a self-conscious research program for understanding intentionality.
 
Loar, Brian (2003). Phenomenal intentionality as the basis of mental content. In Martin Hahn & B. Ramberg (eds.), Reflections and Replies: Essays on the Philosophy of Tyler Burge. MIT Press.   (Cited by 18 | Google) 
 
Lycan, William (2008). Phenomenal intentionalities. American Philosophical Quarterly 45 (3):233-252.   (Google)
Abstract: There is now a considerable literature that goes under the heading of “phenomenal intentionality.” But it features a number of distinct issues. What they have in common is the claim that intentionality bears a closer relation to phenomenology than had previously been recognized. There is a basic thesis, which is controversial, and there are further arguments attempting to draw more exciting morals from the basic thesis. My purpose in this paper is to survey these issues, see what may be at stake, and adjudicate
 
Meehan, Douglas B. (2002). Qualitative character and sensory representations. Consciousness and Cognition 11 (4):630-641.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Meixner, Uwe (2006). Classical intentionality. Erkenntnis 65 (1):25-45.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In the first part, the paper describes in detail the classical conception of intentionality which was expounded in its most sophisticated form by Edmund Husserl. This conception is today largely eclipsed in the philosophy of mind by the functionalist and by the representationalist account of intentionality, the former adopted by Daniel Dennett and David Chalmers, the latter by John Searle and Fred Dretske. The very considerable differences between the classical and the modern conceptions are pointed out, and it is argued that the classical conception is more satisfactory than the two modern ones, not only regarding phenomenal adequacy, but also on the grounds of epistemological considerations. In the second part, the paper argues that classical intentionality is not naturalizable, that is, physicalizable. Since classical intentionality exists (in the experiences that display it), the non-naturalizability of classical intentionality implies psychophysical dualism






 
Menary, Richard (2009). Intentionality and Consciousness. In William Banks (ed.), Encyclopaedia of Consciousness. Elsevier.   (Google)
Abstract: Intentionality is usually defined as the directedness of the mind toward something other than itself. My desire for a cold beer is directed at the cold beer in front of me. Much of consciousness is intentional, my conscious experiences are usually directed at something. However, conscious experiences typically have a phenomenal character: there is something it is like for me to see the deep blue of the Pacific Ocean and to feel the warm water lapping over my feet, and to smell the briny breeze. An important question to answer concerning the relationship between intentionality and consciousness is whether all conscious states are intentional? Another question concerns the explanatory priority of intentionality and phenomenal character: Can phenomenal character be explained in terms of intentionality? Or is it the case that intentionality should be understood in terms of phenomenology? Philosophers from the analytic, phenomenological, and naturalistic traditions have all made important contributions to our understanding of intentionality and consciousness. Some philosophers, such as Dretske, think that our phenomenology is intentionally structured. Others, such as Horgan and Tienson think that intentionality is fundamentally determined by our phenomenology. This looks like an impasse; however it may well be resolved by a combination of contemporary accounts of representation combined with an embodied phenomenology.
 
Miller, George H. (1999). How phenomenological content determines the intentional object. Husserl Studies 16 (1):1-24.   (Google | More links) 






 
Montague, Michelle (2009). The logic, intentionality, and phenomenology of emotion. Philosophical Studies 145 (2):171-192.   (Google)
Abstract: My concern in this paper is with the intentionality of emotions. Desires and cognitions are the traditional paradigm cases of intentional attitudes, and one very direct approach to the question of the intentionality of emotions is to treat it as sui generis—as on a par with the intentionality of desires and cognitions but in no way reducible to it. A more common approach seeks to reduce the intentionality of emotions to the intentionality of familiar intentional attitudes like desires and cognitions. In this paper, I argue for the sui generis approach
 
Pautz, Adam (2008). The interdependence of phenomenology and intentionality. The Monist 91 (2):250-272.   (Google)
Abstract: I address a second issue that arises once we accept intentionalism: can intentionalists accept the claim of Horgan and Tienson (among others) that phenomenology is in some sense prior to intentionality? And should they?
 
Pitt, David (2009). Intentional psychologism. Philosophical Studies 146 (1).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In the past few years, a number of philosophers (notably, Siewert, C. (The significance of consciousness. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998); Horgan and Tienson (Philosophy of mind: Classical and contemporary readings, Oxford University Press, 2002, pp. 520–533); Pitt 2004) have maintained the following three theses: (1) there is a distinctive sort of phenomenology characteristic of conscious thought, as opposed to other sorts of conscious mental states; (2) different conscious thoughts have different phenomenologies; and (3) thoughts with the same phenomenology have the same intentional content. The last of these three claims is open to at least two different interpretations. It might mean that the phenomenology of a thought expresses its intentional content, where intentional content is understood as propositional, and propositions are understood as mind-and language-independent abstract entities (such as sets of possible worlds, functions from possible worlds to truth-values, structured n-tuples of objects and properties, etc.). And it might mean that the phenomenology of a thought is its intentional content—that is, that the phenomenology of a thought, like the phenomenology of a sensation, constitutes its content. The second sort of view is a kind of psychologism. Psychologistic views hold that one or another sort of thing—numbers, sentences, propositions, etc.—that we can think or know about is in fact a kind of mental thing. Since Frege, psychologism has been in bad repute among analytic philosophers. It is widely held that Frege showed that such views are untenable, since, among other things, they subjectivize what is in fact objective, and, hence, relativize such things as consistency and truth to the peculiarities of human psychology. The purpose of this paper is to explore the consequences of the thesis that intentional mental content is phenomenological (what I call “intentional psychologism”) and to try to reach a conclusion about whether it yields a tenable view of mind, thought and meaning. I believe the thesis is not so obviously wrong as it will strike many philosophers of mind and language. In fact, it can be defended against the standard objections to psychologism, and it can provide the basis for a novel and interesting account of mentality





 
Pitt, David (2004). The phenomenology of cognition, or, what is it like to think that P? Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 69 (1):1-36.   (Cited by 18 | Google | More links) 





 
Potrc, Matjaz (2002). Intentionality of phenomenology in Brentano. Southern Journal of Philosophy 40:231-267.   (Google) 
 
Shani, Itay (2008). Against Consciousness Chauvinism. Monist 91 (2).   (Google) 
 
Shoemaker, Sydney (2001). Introspection and phenomenal character. Philosophical Topics 28 (2):247--73.   (Cited by 30 | Google | More links)
Abstract: […] One view I hold about the nature of phenomenal character, which is also a view about the relation between phenomenal character and the introspective belief about it, is that phenomenal character is “self intimating.” This means that it is of the essence of a state’s having a certain phenomenal character that this issues in the subject’s being introspectively aware of that character, or does so if the subject reflects. Part of my aim is to give an account which makes it intelligible that this should be so. A more substantive view I hold about phenomenal character is that a perceptual state’s having a certain phenomenal character is a matter of its having a certain sort of representational content. This much I hold in common with a number of recent writers, including Gil Harman, Michael Tye, Bill Lycan, and Fred Dretske. But representationalism about phenomenal character often goes with the rejection of “qualia,” and with the rejection of the possibility of spectrum inversion and other sorts of “qualia invesion.” My version of representationalism embraces what other versions reject. It assigns an essential role to qualia, and accepts the possibility of qualia inversion. A central aim of the present paper is to present a version of this view which is free of the defects I now see in my earlier versions of it





 
Thompson, Brad J. (2007). Shoemaker on phenomenal content. Philosophical Studies 135 (3):307--334.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In a series of papers and lectures, Sydney Shoemaker has developed a sophisticated Russellian theory of phenomenal content (1994, 2000, 2001, 2003). It has as its central motivation two considerations. One is the possibility of spectrum-inversion without illusion. The other is the transparency of experience







 
Urkia, Igor Aristegi (2006). Intentionality. Problems of the philosophy of mind. Dialectica 60 (4):505-508.   (Google) 
 
Wilson, Robert A. (2003). Intentionality and phenomenology. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 84 (4):413-431.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 






 
1.5d Conscious Thought




Baars, Bernard J. & McGovern, Katharine A. (2000). Consciousness cannot be limited to sensory qualities: Some empirical counterexamples. Neuro-Psychoanalysis 2 (1):11-13.   (Google) 
 
Brown, Richard (2007). The mark of the mental. Southwest Philosophy Review 23 (1):117-124.   (Google)
Abstract: In the Standard Model of the Mind currently employed in cognitive science we have corresponding to thought and sense two distinct kinds of properties: intentional and qualitative. On the one hand we have qualitative states, which are generally agreed to be those states which there is ‘something that it is like’ for the subject that has them; I will say that these states have a quality. On the other hand we have intentional states, which have the property of being about something, called intentionality, and which lack a quality. There is nothing that it is like to have intentional states. According to the Standard Model all mental phenomena have one or another, or both, of these properties. There are some mental phenomena that are purely qualitative (perhaps sensations and their sensory qualities) and some that are purely intentional (thoughts) and still others that are a mix of both (perceptions and emotions). Of course, there are those who resist the Standard Model, drawn as they are to the siren song of a single mark of the mental
 
Carruthers, Peter (2006). Conscious experience versus conscious thought. In Uriah Kriegel & Kenneth Williford (eds.), Consciousness and Self-Reference. MIT Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: Are there different constraints on theories of conscious experience as against theories of conscious propositional thought? Is what is problematic or puzzling about each of these phenomena of the same, or of different, types? And to what extent is it plausible to think that either or both conscious experience and conscious thought involve some sort of selfreference? In pursuing these questions I shall also explore the prospects for a defensible form of eliminativism concerning conscious thinking, one that would leave the reality of conscious experience untouched. In the end, I shall argue that while there might be no such thing as conscious judging or conscious wanting, there is (or may well be) such a thing as conscious generic thinking
 
Carruthers, Peter (1998). Conscious thinking: Language or elimination? Mind and Language 13 (4):457-476.   (Cited by 21 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Do we conduct our conscious propositional thinking in natural language? Or is such language only peripherally related to human conscious thought-processes? In this paper I shall present a partial defence of the former view, by arguing that the only real alternative is eliminativism about conscious propositional thinking. Following some introductory remarks, I shall state the argument for this conclusion, and show how that conclusion can be true. Thereafter I shall defend each of the three main premises in turn















 
Coates, Paul (1987). Swinburne on thought and consciousness. Philosophical Studies 52 (September):227-238.   (Google | More links) 




 
Cole, David J. (1994). Thought and qualia. Minds and Machines 4 (3):283-302.   (Google | More links) 






 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1968). Content and Consciousness. Routledge.   (Cited by 351 | Google | More links) 










 
Gillett, Grant R. (1987). The generality constraint and conscious thought. Analysis 47 (January):20-24.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Goldman, A. (1993). The psychology of folk psychology. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 16:15-28.   (Cited by 135 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: The central mission of cognitive science is to reveal the real nature of the mind, however familiar or foreign that nature may be to naive preconceptions. The existence of naive conceptions is also important, however. Prescientific thought and language contain concepts of the mental, and these concepts deserve attention from cognitive science. Just as scientific psychology studies folk physics (McCloskey 1983, Hayes 1985), viz., the common understanding (or misunderstanding) of physical phenomena, so it must study folk psychology, the common understanding of mental states. This subfield of scientific psychology is what I mean by the phrase 'the psychology of folk psychology'





 
Hookway, Christopher (1981). Conscious belief and deliberation. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 75:75-89.   (Google) 
 
Jacob, Pierre (1998). What is the phenomenology of thought? Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 63 (2):443-448.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 




 
Klausen, Sørenarnow H. (2008). The phenomenology of propositional attitudes. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 7 (4).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Propositional attitudes are often classified as non-phenomenal mental states. I argue that there is no good reason for doing so. The unwillingness to view propositional attitudes as being essentially phenomenal stems from a biased notion of phenomenality, from not paying sufficient attention to the idioms in which propositional attitudes are usually reported, from overlooking the considerable degree to which different intentional modes can be said to be phenomenologically continuous, and from not considering the possibility that propositional attitudes may be transparent, just like sensations and emotions are commonly held to be: there may be no appropriate way of describing their phenomenal character apart from describing the properties and objects they represent





 
Kriegel, Uriah (2003). Consciousness as sensory quality and as implicit self-awareness. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 2 (1):1-26.   (Cited by 12 | Google | More links) 






 
Nathan, N. M. L. (1982). Conscious belief. Analysis 42 (March):90-93.   (Google) 
 
Nelkin, Norton (1989). Propositional attitudes and consciousness. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 49 (March):413-30.   (Cited by 13 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Rey, Georges (2007). Phenomenal content and the richness and determinacy of colour experience. Journal of Consciousness Studies 14 (s 9-10):112-131.   (Google) 
 
Robinson, William S. (2005). Thoughts without distinctive non-imagistic phenomenology. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 70 (3):534-561.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 





 
Baker, Lynne Rudder (2002). Conscious and unconscious intentionality in practical realism. MeQRiMa Rivista Di Analisi Testo Letterario E Figurativo 5:130-135.   (Google) 
 
Ten Hoor, Marten (1934). Thought as awareness and thought as behavior. Journal of Philosophy 31 (20):533-543.   (Google | More links) 





 
Wallis, Charles (2008). Consciousness, context, and know-how. Synthese 160 (1).   (Cited by 4 | Google)
Abstract: In this paper I criticize the most significant recent examples of the practical knowledge analysis of knowledge-how in the philosophical literature: David Carr [1979, Mind, 88, 394–409; 1981a, American Philosophical Quarterly, 18, 53–61; 1981b, Journal of Philosophy of Education, 15(1), 87–96] and Stanley & Williamson [2001, Journal of Philosophy, 98(8), 411–444]. I stress the importance of know-how in our contemporary understanding of the mind, and offer the beginnings of a treatment of know-how capable of providing insight in to the use of know-how in contemporary cognitive science. Specifically, I claim that Carr’s necessary conditions for know-how fail to capture the distinction he himself draws between ability and knowing-how. Moreover, Carr ties knowing-how to conscious intent, and to an explicit knowledge of procedural rules. I argue that both moves are mistakes, which together render Carr’s theory an inadequate account both of common ascriptions of knowledge-how and of widely accepted ascriptions of knowledge-how within explanations in cognitive science. Finally, I note that Carr’s conditions fail to capture intuitions (heshares) regarding the ascription of know-how to persons lacking ability. I then consider the position advocated by Stanley & Williamson (2001), which seems avoid Carr’s commitments to conscious intent and explicit knowledge while still maintaining that “knowledge-how is simply a species of knowledge-that" (Stanley & Williamson, 2001, p. 411). I argue that Stanley and Williamson’s attempt to frame a reductionist view that avoids consciously occurrent beliefs during exercises of knowledge-how and explicit knowledge of procedural rules is both empirically implausible and explanatorily vacuous. In criticizing these theories I challenge the presuppositions of the most pervasive response to Ryle in the philosophic literature, what might be described as “the received view." I also establish several facts about knowing-how. First, neither conscious intent nor explicit representation (much less conscious representation) of procedural rules are necessary for knowing-how given the theory of cognition current in cognitive science. I argue that the discussed analyses fail to capture the necessary conditions for knowledge-how because know-how requires the instantiation of an ability and of the capacities necessary for exploiting an ability—not conscious awareness of purpose or explicit knowledge of rules. Second, one must understand knowledge-how as task-specific, i.e., as presupposing certain underlying conditions. Conceiving of know-how as task-specific allows one to understand ascriptions of know-how in the absence of ability as counterfactual ascriptions based upon underlying competence
 
Wilkes, Kathleen V. (1981). Conscious belief and deliberation. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 91:91-107.   (Google) 
 
Williams, John N. (2006). Moore's paradox and conscious belief. Philosophical Studies 127 (3):383-414.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: For Moore, it is a paradox that although I would be absurd in asserting that (it is raining but I don








 
Worley, Sara (1997). Belief and consciousness. Philosophical Psychology 10 (1):41-55.   (Annotation | Google)





Abstract: In this paper, I argue that we should not ascribe beliefs and desires to subjects like zombies or (present day) computers which do not have phenomenal consciousness. In order to ascribe beliefs, we must distinguish between personal and subpersonal content. There may be states in my brain which represent the array of light intensities on my retina, but these states are not beliefs, because they are merely subpersonal. I argue that we cannot distinguish between personal and subpersonal content without reference to phenomenal consciousness. I argue for this by examining two attempts to account for belief without reference to phenomenal consciousness, functionalism and Dennett's patterns of behavior theory, and showing that they both fail. In the course of the arguments that these attempts fail, I develop some positive reasons for believing that phenomenal consciousness is indeed necessary
 
Wu, Wayne (forthcoming). What is Conscious Attention? Philosophy and Phenomenological Research.   (Google)
Abstract: Perceptual attention is essential to both thought and agency, for there is arguably no demonstrative thought or bodily action without it. Psychologists and philosophers since William James have taken attention to be a ubiquitous and distinctive form of consciousness, one that leaves a characteristic mark on perceptual experience. As a process of selecting specific perceptual inputs, attention influences the way things perceptually appear. It may then seem that it is a specific feature of perceptual representation that constitutes what it is like to consciously attend to an object. In fact conscious attention is more complicated. In what follows, I argue that the phenomenology of conscious attention to what is perceived involves not just a way of perceptually locking on to a specific object. It necessarily involves a way of cognitively locking on to it as well.
 
1.5e Internalism and Externalism about Experience




Adams, Frederick R. & Dietrich, Laura A. (2004). Swampman's revenge: Squabbles among the representationalists. Philosophical Psychology 17 (3):323-40.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: There are both externalist and internalist theories of the phenomenal content of conscious experiences. Externalists like Dretske and Tye treat the phenomenal content of conscious states as representations of external properties (and events). Internalists think that phenomenal conscious states are reducible to electrochemical states of the brain in the style of the type-type identity theory. In this paper, we side with the representationalists and visit a dispute between them over the test case of Swampman. Does Swampman have conscious phenomenal states or not? Dretske and Tye disagree on this issue. We try to settle the dispute in favor of Dretske's theory (to our own surprise)







 
Biro, John I. (1996). Dretske on phenomenal externalism. Philosophical Issues 7:171-178.   (Google | More links) 





 
Byrne, Alex & Tye, Michael (2006). Qualia ain't in the head. Noûs 40 (2):241-255.   (Cited by 9 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Qualia internalism is the thesis that qualia are intrinsic to their subjects: the experiences of intrinsic duplicates (in the same or different metaphysically possible worlds) have the same qualia. Content externalism is the thesis that mental representation is an extrinsic matter, partly depending on what happens outside the head.1 Intentionalism (or representationalism) comes in strong and weak forms. In its weakest formulation, it is the thesis that representationally identical experiences of subjects (in the same or different metaphysically possible worlds) have the same qualia.2








 
Crane, Tim (2006). Comment on Ted Honderich's radical externalism. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (s 7-8):28-43.   (Google)
Abstract: Ted Honderich's theory of consciousness as existence, which he here calls Radical Externalism, starts with a good phenomenological observation: that perceptual experience appears to involve external things being immediately present to us. As P.F. Strawson once observed, when asked to describe my current perceptual state, it is normally enough simply to describe the things around me (Strawson, 1979, p. 97). But in my view that does not make the whole theory plausible
 
Davies, Martin (1993). Aims and claims of externalist arguments. Philosophical Issues 4:227-249.   (Cited by 9 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Davies, Martin (1997). Externalism and experience. In Ned Block & Owen J. Flanagan (eds.), The Nature of Consciousness: Philosophical Debates. MIT Press.   (Cited by 23 | Google) 
 
Davies, Martin (1991). Individualism and perceptual content. Mind 100 (399):461-84.   (Cited by 27 | Google | More links) 





 
Davies, Martin (1992). Perceptual content and local supervenience. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 66:21-45.   (Cited by 22 | Annotation | Google)




  
de Vries, Willem A. (1996). Experience and the swamp creature. Philosophical Studies 82 (1):55-80.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Dretske, Fred (1996). Phenomenal externalism. Philosophical Issues 7.   (Google) 
 
Dretske, Fred (1996). Phenomenal externalism, or if meanings ain't in the head, where are qualia? Philosophical Issues 7:143-158.   (Cited by 19 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Egan, Andy & John, James (ms). A puzzle about perception.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: experience supervene on the intrinsic properties of the experience





 
Ellis, Jonathan (ms). Can an externalist about concepts be an internalist about phenomenal character.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Many philosophers today believe that what an individual is thinking does not depend entirely on the individual






 
Ellis, Jonathan (2007). Content externalism and phenomenal character: A new worry about privileged access. Synthese 159 (1).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: A central question in contemporary epistemology concerns whether content externalism threatens a common doctrine about privileged access. If the contents of a subject






 
Ellis, Jonathan (2010). Phenomenal character, phenomenal concepts, and externalism. Philosophical Studies 147 (2).   (Google)
Abstract: A celebrated problem for representationalist theories of phenomenal character is that, given externalism about content, these theories lead to externalism about phenomenal character. While externalism about content is widely accepted, externalism about phenomenal character strikes many philosophers as wildly implausible. Even if internally identical individuals could have different thoughts, it is said, if one of them has a headache, or a tingly sensation, so must the other. In this paper, I argue that recent work on phenomenal concepts reveals that, contrary to appearances, this standard conjunction of externalism about content and internalism about phenomenal character is ultimately untenable on other models of phenomenal character as well, including even “qualia realism.” This would be significant for a number of reasons. The first is patent: it would undermine a primary objection to representationalism. The fact that representationalism is incompatible with the conjunction would be no serious problem for representationalism if no other plausible model of phenomenal character is compatible with it. The second is that the many philosophers who embrace the conjunction would be forced to abandon one of the two views; externalism would be true either of both content and phenomenal character, or of neither. Likewise, those philosophers who have taken a stance on only one of the two internalism/externalism debates would have to be seen as thereby committed to a particular stance on the other. The third reason stems from the fact that qualia realism typically goes hand in hand with internalism about phenomenal character. To the extent that it does, my argument would reveal that qualia realism is itself in tension with externalism about content. This would perhaps be the most surprising result of all
 
Forbes, Graeme R. (1997). Externalism and scientific cartesianism. Mind and Language 12 (2):196-205.   (Google | More links) 








 
Freeman, Anthony (2006). Radical Externalism: Honderich's Theory of Consciousness Discussed. Exeter: Imprint Academic.   (Google) 
 
Freeman, Anthony (2006). Special issue on radical externalism - editorial preface. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (7-8):1-1.   (Google) 
 
Noë, Alva (2006). Experience without the head. In John Hawthorne & Tamar Szab'o Gendler (eds.), Perceptual Experience. Oxford University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: Some cognitive states — e.g. states of thinking, calculating, navigating — may be partially external because, at least sometimes, these states depend on the use of symbols and artifacts that are outside the body. Maps, signs, writing implements may sometimes be as inextricably bound up with the workings of cognition as neural structures or internally realized symbols (if there are any). According to what Clark and Chalmers [1998] call active externalism, the environment can drive and so partially constitute cognitive processes. Where does the mind stop and the rest of the world begin? If active externalism is right, then the boundary cannot be drawn at the skull. The mind reaches – or at least can reach --- beyond the limits of the body out into the world
 
Hawthorne, John (2004). Why Humeans are out of their minds. Noûs 38 (2):351-58.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 





 
Hellie, Benj (2010). An externalist's guide to inner experience. In Bence Nanay (ed.), Perceiving the World. Oxford University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: Let's be externalists about perceptual consciousness and think the form of veridical perceptual consciousness includes /seeing this or that mind-independent particular and its colors/. Let's also take internalism seriously, granting that spectral inversion and hallucination can be "phenomenally" the same as normal seeing. Then perceptual consciousness and phenomenality are different, and so we need to say how they are related. It's complicated!

Phenomenal sameness is (against all odds) /reflective indiscriminability/. I build a "displaced perception" account of reflection on which indiscriminability stems from shared "qualia". Qualia are compatible with direct realism: while they generate an explanatory gap (and colors do not), so does /seeing/; qualia are excluded from perceptual consciousness by its "transparency"; instead, qualia are aspects of thought about the perceived environment. 

The asymmetry between my treatments of color and seeing is grounded in the asymmetry between ignorance and error: while inversion shows that normal subjects are ignorant of the natures of the colors, hallucination shows not that perceivers are ignorant of the nature of seeing but that hallucinators are prone to error about their condition. Past literature has treated inversion and hallucination as on a par: externalists see error in both cases, while internalists see mutual ignorance. My account is so complicated because plausible results require mixing it up.
 
Honderich, Ted (2006). Radical externalism. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (7-8):3-13.   (Cited by 11 | Google | More links)
Abstract: If you want a philosophically diligent exposition of a theory, something that has got through review by conventional peers, go elsewhere (Honderich, 2004). If you want an understanding made more immediate by brevity and informality, read on. The theory is a Radical Externalism about the nature of consciousness. If it is not a complete departure from the cranialism of most of the philosophy and science of consciousness, it is a fundamental departure






 
Horwich, Paul (1996). Comment on Dretske. Philosophical Issues 7:167-170.   (Google | More links) 





 
Igel, Solomon (1995). A few remarks concerning a science of sensory phenomena. Axiomathes 6 (1).   (Google | More links) 




 
Kim, Jaegwon (1996). Dretske's qualia externalism. Philosophical Issues 7:159-165.   (Google | More links) 





 
Kirk, Robert E. (1998). Consciousness, information, and external relations. Communication and Cognition 30 (3-4):249-71.   (Google) 
 
Kirk, Robert E. (1994). The trouble with ultra-externalism. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 68:293-307.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Kirk, Robert E. (1996). Why ultra-externalism goes too far. Analysis 56 (2):73-79.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Kriegel, Uriah (2006). Externalism: Putting mind and world back together again. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 72 (2):487-490.   (Google) 
 
Lalor, Brendan J. (1999). Intentionality and qualia. Synthese 121 (3):249-290.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Law, Stephen (2006). Honderich and the curse of epiphenomenalism. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (7-8):61-70.   (Google) 
 
Lowe, E. J. (2006). Radical externalism or Berkeley revisited? Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (s 7-8):78-94.   (Google)
Abstract: Ted Honderich's 'Radical Externalism' concerning the nature of consciousness is a refreshing, and in many ways very appealing, approach to a long- standing and seemingly intractable philosophical conundrum. Although I sympathize with many of his motivations in advancing the theory and share his hostility for certain alternative approaches that are currently popular, I will serve him better by playing devil's advocate than by simply recording my points of agreement with him. If his theory is a good one, it should be able to stand up to the strongest criticisms that we can muster against it. I shall do my best to articulate some of those criticisms as forcefully as I can
 
Lycan, William G. (2001). The case for phenomenal externalism. Philosophical Perspectives 15:17-35.   (Cited by 22 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Since Twin Earth was discovered by American philosophical-space explorers in the 1970s, the domain of









 
Macpherson, Fiona (2005). Colour inversion problems for representationalism. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 70 (1):127-152.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper I examine whether representationalism can account for various thought experiments about colour inversions. Representationalism is, at minimum, the view that, necessarily, if two experiences have the same representational content then they have the same phenomenal character. I argue that representationalism ought to be rejected if one holds externalist views about experiential content and one holds traditional exter- nalist views about the nature of the content of propositional attitudes. Thus, colour inver- sion scenarios are more damaging to externalist representationalist views than have been previously thought. More specifically, I argue that representationalists who endorse externalism about experiential content either have to become internalists about the content of propositional attitudes or they have to adopt a novel variety of externalism about the content of propositional attitudes. This novel type of propositional attitude externalism is investigated. It can be seen that adopting it forces one to reject Putnam








 
Macpherson, Fiona (2000). Representational Theories of Phenomenal Character. Dissertation, University of Stirling   (Google | More links) 




 
McCulloch, Gregory (1990). Externalism and experience. Analysis 50 (October):244-50.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google)




  
McCulloch, Gregory (1994). Not much trouble for ultra-externalism. Analysis 54 (4):265-9.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
McCulloch, Gregory (2002). Phenomenological externalism. In Nicholas Smith (ed.), Reading McDowell. Routledge.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
McCulloch, Gregory (2003). The Life of the Mind: An Essay on Phenomenological Externalism. Routledge.   (Cited by 17 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The Life of the Mind presents an original and striking conception of the mind and its place in nature. In a spirited and rigorous attack on most of the orthodox positions in contemporary philosophy of mind, McCulloch connects three of the orthodoxy's central themes-- externalism, phenomenology and the relation between science and commonsense psychology in a defense of a thoroughly anti-Cartesian conception of mental life. McCulloch argues that the life of the mind will never be understood until we properly understand the subject's essential embodiment and immersion in the world, until we give up the idea that an understanding of the mind must be "scientific," and until we give up the idea that intentionality and phenomenology must be understood separately





 
Pautz, Adam (ms). Sensory awareness as irreducible: From internalist intentionalism to primitivism.   (Cited by 2 | Google)
Abstract: I am going to develop an argument against Physicalism concerning qualitative mental properties. Unlike most arguments against Physicalism, it is not based on the usual _a priori_ considerations, such as what Mary learns when she comes out of her black and white room or the apparent conceivability of Zombies. Rather, it is based on two broadly _a posteriori_ premises about the structure of experience and its physical basis
 
Pautz, Adam (2006). Sensory awareness is not a wide physical relation: An empirical argument against externalist intentionalism. Noûs 40 (2):205-240.   (Cited by 8 | Google | More links) 








 
Pautz, Adam (online). Tracking intentionalism and optimal conditions: A reply to Byrne and Tye.   (Google)
Abstract: In the mid-nineties, Fred Dretske, William Lycan and Michael Tye published books defending an ambitious new reductive program. The program came in two stages. The first was to defend Intentionalism. The second was to reduce the secondary qualities to external physical properties and then to explain sensory representation in terms of tracking under optimal conditions or biological function. The old reductive program was internalist: the idea used to be that we could reduce experiences to brain states. The new reductive program is externalist
 
Priest, Stephen (2006). Radical internalism. In Anthony Freeman (ed.), Radical Externalism: Honderich's Theory of Consciousness Discussed. Exeter: Imprint Academic.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Robinson, Howard M. (1992). Experience and externalism: A reply to Peter Smith. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 92:221-223.   (Google) 
 
Robinson, Howard M. (1993). Physicalism, externalism and perceptual representation. In Edmond Leo Wright (ed.), New Representationalisms: Essays in the Philosophy of Perception. Brookfield: Avebury.   (Google) 
 
Ross, Peter W. (1999). An externalist approach to understanding color experience. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22 (6):968-969.   (Google)
Abstract: Palmer demarcates the bounds of our understanding of color experience by symmetries in the color space. He claims that if there are symmetries, there can be functionally undetectable color transformations. However, even if there are symmetries, Palmer's support for the possibility of undetectable transformations assumes phenomenal internalism. Alternatively, phenomenal externalism eliminates Palmer's limit on our understanding of color experience
 
Rowlands, Mark (2002). Two dogmas of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 9 (5-6):158-80.   (Cited by 8 | Google) 
 
Sartwell, Crispin (1995). Radical externalism concerning experience. Philosophical Studies 78 (1):55-70.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Schroer, Robert (2009). Does the Phenomenality of Perceptual Experience Present an Obstacle to Phenomenal Externalism? Philosophical Papers 39 (1):93-110.   (Google)
Abstract: : Although Externalism is widely accepted as a thesis about belief, as a thesis about experience it is both controversial and unpopular. One potential explanation of this difference involves the phenomenality of perceptual experience—perhaps there is something about how perceptual experiences seem that straightforwardly speaks against Externalist accounts of their individuation conditions. In this paper, I investigate this idea by exploring the role that the phenomenality of color experience plays in a prominent argument against Phenomenal Externalism: Ned Block’s Inverted Earth Argument. In the course of carrying out this investigation, I will show that challenging Phenomenal Externalism on phenomenological grounds is not as straightforward a task as it is commonly assumed to be. 
 
Smith, Barry C. (2006). Consciousness: An inner view of the outer world. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (7-8):175-86.   (Google)
Abstract: Right now my conscious experience is directed at part of the world. It takes in some aspects of things around me and not others. Some bits of the world occupy my attention, other worldly goings on condition or colour the character of my current perceptual experience. I experience buildings in view through the window, the clothes in the corner of the room, the colour of the walls, the plate with breads, the coffee mugs, the smell of fresh laundry, the muffled sounds of someone in the kitchen, the sounds from the street: a sequence of things that in turn capture my attention moment to moment. And all the while thoughts occur to me, modulating my conscious awareness. I have no doubt that the world and my place in it, together with my recent past history, explains the particular form my consciousness takes right now. But what shape does that explanation take? Things out there beyond the boundaries of my skin enter into the conscious events I undergo. The inner is in this way shaped and determined by those outer things that impress themselves on the mind. What is it, though, for consciousness of this kind to go on at all?
 
Snowdon, Paul F. (2006). Radical externalisms. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (7-8):187-198.   (Google)
Abstract: Professor Honderich presents his account of consciousness boldly and informally, and his presentation merits a response in similar terms. I conceive of this response as simply the first move in a conversation, in the course of which misunderstandings might be removed and, just possibly, criticisms sharpened, and positions modified. I want to concentrate on two questions that his very interesting paper prompts me to ask. The first question is; what exactly is the thesis about consciousness that Professor Honderich is proposing? The second question is; what are the main reasons he has for his proposal and are they persuasive? Although there are two questions, I shall mix considerations of them together in a way which I hope it is possible to follow
 
Stephen, Priest (2006). Radical internalism. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (s 7-8):147-174.   (Google)
Abstract: Honderich claims that for a person to be perceptually conscious is for a world to exist. I decide what this means, and whether it could be true, in the opening section Consciousness and Existence. In Honderich's Phenomenology, I show that Honderich's theory is essentially anticipated in the ideas and Ideas of Husserl. In the third section, Radical Interiority, I argue that although phenomenology putatively eschews ontology of mind, and Honderich construes his position as near- physicalism, Honderich's insights are only truths because we are spiritual substances
 
Stoneham, Tom (1992). Comment on Davies: A general dilemma? Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 92:225-231.   (Google) 
 
Tappenden, Paul (1996). The roundsquare copula: A semantic internalist's rejoinder. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 96:395-400.   (Google) 
 
Tonneau, F. (2004). Consciousness outside the head. Behavior and Philosophy 32:97-123.   (Cited by 8 | Google) 
 
Tye, Michael (forthcoming). Phenomenal externalism, lolita, and the planet xenon. In Terence E. Horgan & David Sosa (eds.), Collection on the Philosophy of Jaegwon Kim.   (Google) 
 
Veldeman, Johan (2001). Externalism and phenomenal content. Communication and Cognition 34 (1-2):155-177.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Velmans, Max (1992). Reply to Gillett's consciousness, intentionality and internalism. Philosophical Psychology 5 (2):181-182.   (Google) 
 
Velmans, Max (ms). Where experiences are: Dualist, physicalist, enactive and reflexive accounts of phenomenal consciousness.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Dualists believe that experiences have neither location nor extension, while reductive and ‘non-reductive’ physicalists (biological naturalists) believe that experiences are really in the brain, producing an apparent impasse in current theories of mind. Enactive and reflexive models of perception try to resolve this impasse with a form of “externalism” that challenges the assumption that experiences must either be nowhere or in the brain. However, they are externalist in very different ways. Insofar as they locate experiences anywhere, enactive models locate conscious phenomenology in the dynamic interaction of organisms with the external world, and in some versions, they reduce conscious phenomenology to such interactions, in the hope that this will resolve the hard problem of consciousness. The reflexive model accepts that experiences of the world result from dynamic organism-environment interactions, but argues that such interactions are preconscious. While the resulting phenomenal world is a consequence of such interactions, it cannot be reduced to them. The reflexive model is externalist in its claim that this external phenomenal world, which we normally think of as the “physical world,” is literally outside the brain. Furthermore, there are no added conscious experiences of the external world inside the brain. In the present paper I present the case for the enactive and reflexive alternatives to more classical views and evaluate their consequences. I argue that, in closing the gap between the phenomenal world and what we normally think of as the physical world, the reflexive model resolves one facet of the hard problem of consciousness. Conversely, while enactive models have useful things to say about percept formation and representation, they fail to address the hard problem of consciousness










 
Weatherson, Brian (2007). Humeans aren't out of their minds. Noûs 41 (3):529–535.   (Google | More links) 




 
1.5f Phenomenal Concepts




Alter, Torin, Introduction to phenomenal concepts and phenomenal knowledge: New essays on consciousness and physicalism (oup, 2007).   (Google)
Abstract: This volume presents thirteen new essays on phenomenal concepts and phenomenal knowledge: twelve by philosophers and one by a scientist. In this introduction, we provide some background and summarize the essays
 
Alter, Torin (2007). On the conditional analysis of phenomenal concepts. Philosophical Studies 134 (2).   (Google)
Abstract:   Zombies make trouble for physicalism. Intuitively, they seem conceivable, and many take this to support their metaphysical possibility – a result that, most agree, would refute physicalism. John Hawthorne (2002) [Philosophical Studies 109, 17–52] and David Braddon-Mitchell (2003) [The Journal of Philosophy 100, 111–135] have developed a novel response to this argument: phenomenal concepts have a conditional structure – they refer to non-physical states if such states exist and otherwise to physical states – and this explains the zombie intuition. I argue that this strategy fails. The considerations Hawthorne and Braddon-Mitchell adduce in support of their analysis in fact do no such thing. Further, their main argument for the analysis is self-defeating: exactly similar reasoning would undermine the view it is meant to establish. Finally, on closer inspection the conditional analysis is incompatible with the zombie intuition. Thus, not only is the analysis incapable of explaining the intuition: the intuition’s plausibility indicates that the analysis is incorrect. I also suggest that the allure of the conditional-analysis strategy may derive from a questionable view about what explaining the intuition would require
 
Alter, Torin (2006). On the conditional analysis of phenomenal concepts. Philosophical Studies 131 (3):777-778.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Zombies make trouble for physicalism. Intuitively, they seem conceivable, and many take this to support their metaphysical possibility – a result that, most agree, would refute physicalism. John Hawthorne (2002) [Philosophical Studies 109, 17–52] and David Braddon-Mitchell (2003) [The Journal of Philosophy 100, 111–135] have developed a novel response to this argument: phenomenal concepts have a conditional structure – they refer to non-physical states if such states exist and otherwise to physical states – and this explains the zombie intuition. I argue that this strategy fails. The considerations Hawthorne and Braddon-Mitchell adduce in support of their analysis in fact do no such thing. Further, their main argument for the analysis is self-defeating: exactly similar reasoning would undermine the view it is meant to establish. Finally, on closer inspection the conditional analysis is incompatible with the zombie intuition. Thus, not only is the analysis incapable of explaining the intuition: the intuition’s plausibility indicates that the analysis is incorrect. I also suggest that the allure of the conditional-analysis strategy may derive from a questionable view about what explaining the intuition would require





 
Alter, Torin & Walter, Sven (eds.) (2007). Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links)
Abstract: What is the nature of consciousness? How is consciousness related to brain processes? This volume collects thirteen new papers on these topics: twelve by leading and respected philosophers and one by a leading color-vision scientist. All focus on consciousness in the "phenomenal" sense: on what it's like to have an experience. Consciousness has long been regarded as the biggest stumbling block for physicalism, the view that the mind is physical. The controversy has gained focus over the last few decades, and phenomenal knowledge and phenomenal concepts--knowledge of consciousness and the associated concepts--have come to play increasingly prominent roles in this debate. Consider Frank Jackson's famous case of Mary, the super-scientist who learns all the physical information while confined in a black-and-white room. According to Jackson, if physicalism is true, then Mary's physical knowledge should allow her to deduce what it's like to see in color. Yet it seems intuitively clear that she learns something when she leaves the room. But then how can consciousness be physical? Arguably, whether this sort of reasoning is sound depends on how phenomenal concepts and phenomenal knowledge are construed. For example, some argue that the Mary case reveals something about phenomenal concepts but has no implications for the nature of consciousness itself. Are responses along these lines adequate? Or does the problem arise again at the level of phenomenal concepts? The papers in this volume engage with the latest developments in this debate. The authors' perspectives range widely. For example, Daniel Dennett argues that anti-physicalist arguments such as the knowledge argument are simply confused; David Papineau grants that such arguments at least reveal important features of phenomenal concepts; and David Chalmers defends the anti-physicalist arguments, arguing that the "phenomenal concept strategy" cannot succeed






 
Alward, Peter (2004). Is phenomenal pain the primary intension of 'pain'? Metaphysica 5 (1):15-28.   (Google)
Abstract: two-dimensional modal framework introduced by Evans [2] and developed by Davies and Humberstone. [3] This framework provides Chalmers with a powerful tool for handling the most serious objection to conceivability arguments for dualism: the problem of..
 
Antony, Michael V. (2006). Papineau on the vagueness of phenomenal concepts. Dialectica 60 (4):475-483.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Aranyosi, István (ms). Papineau's (in)determinacy problem.   (Google) 
 
Aranyosi, István (2008). Review of Torin Alter and Sven Walter (eds.) Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge. Mind 117 (467):665-669.   (Google) 
 
Aydede, Murat & Guzeldere, Guven (2004). Cognitive architecture, concepts, and introspection: An information-theoretic solution to the problem of phenomenal consciousness. [Journal (on-Line/Unpaginated)] (in Press) 39 (2):197--255.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This essay is a sustained attempt to bring new light to some of the perennial problems in philosophy of mind surrounding phenomenal consciousness and introspection through developing an account of sensory and phenomenal concepts. Building on the information-theoretic framework of Dretske (1981), we present an informational psychosemantics as it applies to what we call sensory concepts, concepts that apply, roughly, to so-called secondary qualities of objects. We show that these concepts have a special informational character and semantic structure that closely tie them to the brain states realizing conscious qualitative experiences. We then develop an account of introspection which exploits this special nature of sensory concepts. The result is a new class of concepts, which, following recent terminology, we call phenomenal concepts: these concepts refer to phenomenal experience itself and are the vehicles used in introspection. On our account, the connection between sensory and phenomenal concepts is very tight: it consists in different semantic uses of the same cognitive structures underlying the sensory concepts, such as the concept of red. Contrary to widespread opinion, we show that information theory contains all the resources to satisfy internalist intuitions about phenomenal consciousness, while not offending externalist ones. A consequence of this account is that it explains and predicts the so-called conceivability arguments against physicalism on the basis of the special nature of sensory and phenomenal concepts. Thus we not only show why physicalism is not threatened by such arguments, but also demonstrate its strength in virtue of its ability to predict and explain away such arguments in a principled way. However, we take the main contribution of this work to be what it provides in addition to a response to those conceivability arguments, namely, a substantive account of the interface between sensory and conceptual systems and the mechanisms of introspection as based on the special nature of the information flow between them





 
Balog, Katalin (forthcoming). Acquaintance and the mind-body problem. In Christopher Hill & Simone Gozzano (eds.), Identity Theory. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: In this paper I begin to develop an account of the acquaintance that each of us has with our own conscious states and processes. The account is a speculative proposal about human mental architecture and specifically about the nature of the concepts via which we think in first personish ways about our qualia. In a certain sense my account is neutral between physicalist and dualist accounts of consciousness. As will be clear, a dualist could adopt the account I will offer while maintaining that qualia themselves are non-physical properties. In this case the non-physical nature of qualia may play no role in accounting for the features of acquaintance. But although the account could be used by a dualist, its existence provides enormous support for physicalism. In particular it provides the makings of a positive refutation (i.e., a refutation by construction) of the conceivability arguments and the Mary argument for dualism.
 
Balog, Katalin (2009). Phenomenal Concepts. In Brian McLaughlin, Ansgar Beckermann & Sven Walter (eds.), Oxford Handbook in the Philosophy of Mind. Oxford University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: This article is about the special, subjective concepts we apply to experience, called “phenomenal concepts”. They are of special interest in a number of ways. First, they refer to phenomenal experiences, and the qualitative character of those experiences whose metaphysical status is hotly debated. Conscious experience strike many philosophers as philosophically problematic and difficult to accommodate within a physicalistic metaphysics. Second, PCs are widely thought to be special and unique among concepts. The sense that there is something special about PCs is very closely tied up with features of the epistemic access they afford to qualia. When we deploy phenomenal concepts introspectively to some phenomenally conscious experience as it occurs, we are said to be acquainted with our own conscious experiences. Accounts of PCs either have to explain the acquaintance relation, or acquaintance with our phenomenal experiences has to be denied. PCs have received much attention in recent philosophy of mind mainly because they figure in arguments for dualism and in physicalist responses to these arguments. The main topic of this article is to explore different accounts of phenomenal concepts and their role in recent debates over the metaphysical status of phenomenal consciousness.
 
Balog, Katalin (1999). Conceivability, possibility, and the mind-body problem. Philosophical Review 108 (4):497-528.   (Cited by 31 | Google)
Abstract: This paper was chosen by The Philosopher’s Annual as one of the ten best articles appearing in print in 2000. Reprinted in Volume XXIII of The Philosopher’s Annual. In his very influential book David Chalmers argues that if physicalism is true then every positive truth is a priori entailed by the full physical description – this is called “the a priori entailment thesis – but ascriptions of phenomenal consciousness are not so entailed and he concludes that Physicalism is false. As he puts it, “zombies” are metaphysically possible. I attempt to show (I think successfully) that this argument is refuted by considering an analogous argument in the mouth of a zombie. The conclusion of this argument is false so one of the premises is false. I argue at length that this shows that the original conceivability argument also has a false premise and so is invalid. 
 
Balog, Katalin (forthcoming). In Defense of the Phenomenal Concept Strategy. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research.   (Google)
Abstract: During the last two decades, several different anti-physicalist arguments based on an epistemic or conceptual gap between the phenomenal and the physical have been proposed. The most promising physicalist line of defense in the face of these arguments – the Phenomenal Concept Strategy – is based on the idea that these epistemic and conceptual gaps can be explained by appeal to the nature of phenomenal concepts rather than the nature of non-physical phenomenal properties. Phenomenal concepts, on this proposal, involve unique cognitive mechanisms, but none that could not be fully physically implemented. David Chalmers has recently presented a Master Argument to show that the Phenomenal Concept Strategy – not just this or that version of it, but any version of it – fails. Chalmers argues that the phenomenal concepts posited by such theories are either not physicalistically explicable, or they cannot explain our epistemic situation with regard to qualia. I argue that it is his Master Argument that fails. My claim is his argument does not provide any new reasons to reject the Phenomenal Concept Strategy. I also argue that, although the Phenomenal Concept Strategy is successful in showing that the physicalist is not rationally compelled to give up physicalism in the light of the anti-physicalist arguments, the anti-physicalist is not rationally compelled to give up the anti-physicalist argument in the light of the Phenomenal Concept Strategy either.
 
Balog, Katalin (2008). Review of Torin Alter, Sven wAlter (eds.), Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews 2008 (5).   (Google)
Abstract: The book under review is a collection of thirteen essays on the nature phenomenal concepts and the ways in which phenomenal concepts figure in debates over physicalism. Phenomenal concepts are of special interest in a number of ways. First, they refer to phenomenal experiences, and the qualitative character of those experiences (aka “qualia”) whose metaphysical status is hotly debated. There are recent arguments, originating in Descartes’ famous conceivability argument, that purport to show that phenomenal experience is irreducibly non-physical. Second, phenomenal concepts are widely thought to be special and unique among concepts. Both the anti-physicalist arguments and physicalist replies to these arguments turn on views about the nature of phenomenal concepts. In this review I survey the many ways in which the essays in this volume are engaged (pro or con) with anti-physicalist arguments and the role phenomenal concepts play in these arguments.
 
Balog, Katalin (2004). Review: Thinking about consciousness. Mind 113 (452).   (Google)
Abstract: Papineau in his book provides a detailed defense of physicalism via what has recently been dubbed the “phenomenal concept strategy”. I share his enthusiasm for this approach. But I disagree with his account of how a physicalist should respond to the conceivability arguments. Also I argue that his appeal to teleosemantics in explaining mental quotation is more like a promissory note than an actual theory.
 
Balog, Katalin, Illuminati, zombies and metaphysical gridlock.   (Google)
Abstract: In this paper I survey the landscape of anti-physicalist arguments and physicalist responses to them. The anti-physicalist arguments I discuss start from a premise about a conceptual, epistemic, or explanatory gap between physical and phenomenal descriptions and conclude from this – on a priori grounds – that physicalism is false. My primary aim is to develop a master argument to counter these arguments. With this master argument in place, it is apparent that there is a puzzling symmetry between dualist attacks on physicalism and physicalist replies. Each position can be developed in a way to defend itself from attacks from the other position. Therefore the debate comes down to which metaphysical framework provides the better overall explanatory/theoretical framework.
 
Beaton, Michael (2009). Qualia and Introspection. Journal of Consciousness Studies 16 (5):88-110.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The claim that behaviourally undetectable inverted spectra are possible has been endorsed by many physicalists. I explain why this starting point rules out standard forms of scientific explanation for qualia. The modern ‘phenomenal concept strategy’ is an updated way of defending problematic intuitions like these, but I show that it cannot help to recover standard scientific explanation. I argue that Chalmers is right: we should accept the falsity of physicalism if we accept this problematic starting point. I further argue that accepting this starting point amounts to at least implicitly endorsing certain theoretical claims about the nature of introspection. I therefore suggest that we allow ourselves to be guided, in our quest to understand qualia, by whatever independently plausible theories of introspection we have. I propose that we adopt a more moderate definition of qualia, as those introspectible properties which cannot be fully specified simply by specifying the non-controversially introspectible ‘propositional attitude’ mental states (including seeing x, experiencing x, and so on, where x is a specification of a potentially public state of affairs). Qualia thus defined may well fit plausible, naturalisable accounts of introspection. If so, such accounts have the potential to explain, rather than explain away, the problematic intuitions discussed earlier; an approach that should allow integration of our understanding of qualia with the rest of science.





 
Bermudez, Jose Luis (2004). Vagueness, phenomenal concepts and mind-brain identity. Analysis 64 (2):131-139.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 





 
Blackburn, Simon W. (1975). How to refer to private experience. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 75:201-213.   (Google) 
 
Brandom, Robert B. (ms). No experience necessary: Empiricism, noninferential knowledge, and secondary qualities.   (Google) 
 
Buekens, Filip (2001). Essential indexicality and the irreducibility of phenomenal concepts. Communication and Cognition 34 (1-2):75-97.   (Google) 
 
Byrne, Darragh (ms). The contents of phenomenal concepts.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: 1 I shall mainly concentrate on Loar (1997, 1999), Tye (1999), Papineau (1998, 2002), Levine (1998, 2001) and Chalmers (2003). Only the first three of these authors endorse the claim that the proposal supports materialism. Levine





 
Carruthers, Peter (2003). Phenomenal concepts and higher-order experiences. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 68 (2):316-336.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links) 





 
Carruthers, Peter & Veillet, Benedicte (2007). The phenomenal concept strategy. Journal of Consciousness Studies 14 (s 9-10):212-236.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: A powerful reply to a range of familiar anti-physicalist arguments has recently been developed. According to this reply, our possession of phenomenal concepts can explain the facts that the anti-physicalist claims can only be explained by a non-reductive account of phenomenal consciousness. Chalmers (2006) argues that the phenomenal concept strategy is doomed to fail. This article presents the phenomenal concept strategy, Chalmers' argument against it, and a defence of the strategy against his






 
Chalmers, David J. (2004). Phenomenal concepts and the knowledge argument. In Peter Ludlow, Yujin Nagasawa & Daniel Stoljar (eds.), There's Something About Mary: Essays on Phenomenal Consciousness and Frank Jackson's Knowledge Argument. MIT Press.   (Cited by 16 | Google | More links)
Abstract: *[[This paper is largely based on material in other papers. The first three sections and the appendix are drawn with minor modifications from Chalmers 2002c (which explores issues about phenomenal concepts and beliefs in much more depth, mostly independently of questions about materialism). The main ideas of the last three sections are drawn from Chalmers 1996, 1999, and 2002a, although with considerable revision and elaboration. ]]





 
Chalmers, David J. (2006). Phenomenal concepts and the explanatory gap. In Torin Alter & Sven Walter (eds.), Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 13 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Confronted with the apparent explanatory gap between physical processes and consciousness, there are many possible reactions. Some deny that any explanatory gap exists at all. Some hold that there is an explanatory gap for now, but that it will eventually be closed. Some hold that the explanatory gap corresponds to an ontological gap in nature





 
Chalmers, David J. (2003). The content and epistemology of phenomenal belief. In Quentin Smith & Aleksandar Jokic (eds.), Consciousness: New Philosophical Perspectives. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 44 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Experiences and beliefs are different sorts of mental states, and are often taken to belong to very different domains. Experiences are paradigmatically phenomenal, characterized by what it is like to have them. Beliefs are paradigmatically intentional, characterized by their propositional content. But there are a number of crucial points where these domains intersect. One central locus of intersection arises from the existence of phenomenal beliefs: beliefs that are about experiences






 
Crane, Tim (2005). Papineau on phenomenal concepts. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 71 (1):155-162.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Over the past decade or so, David Papineau has given an account of the content and motivation of a physicalist conception of the world with more thoroughness and argumentative defence than many physicalists have thought necessary. In doing this, he has substantially advanced the debate on physicalism, and physicalists and non-physicalists alike should be grateful to him.1 At the heart of Papineau’s defence of physicalism in his recent book (2002) is his theory of phenomenal concepts. Like many physicalists, Papineau diagnoses the apparent threats to physicalism posed by the phenomena of consciousness by locating the source of anti-physicalist intuitions in features of our thinking rather than in non-physical features of reality. But what is new in Thinking About Consciousness is his detailed account of which features of our thinking it is that generate these supposedly confused anti-physicalist arguments. Hence the bulk of the book is an attempt to show that the most famous ‘consciousness-based’ anti-physicalist arguments—the knowledge argument, the zombie argument and the explanatory gap argument—rest on a mistaken understanding of certain kinds of concepts: phenomenal concepts. I agree with Papineau that physicalism (properly understood) should not be troubled by the knowledge argument and the explanatory gap argument, and that some other anti-physicalist arguments seem to move from assumptions about ways of thinking to conclusions about reality. But I doubt whether his theory of phenomenal concepts can help his defence of physicalism and his diagnosis of the errors of dualism. My reason for saying this is that I do not think there are any such concepts. In saying this I do not mean to deny that there is a useful distinction to be made between scientific concepts, the mastery of which requires knowledge of a certain amount of theory, and concepts which are acquired on the basis of experience, which can be called ‘phenomenal’ concepts..







 
DeLancey, Craig (2007). Phenomenal experience and the measure of information. Erkenntnis 66 (3).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper defends the hypothesis that phenomenal experiences may be very complex information states. This can explain some of our most perplexing anti-physicalist intuitions about phenomenal experience. The approach is to describe some basic facts about information in such a way as to make clear the essential oversight involved, by way illustrating how various intuitive arguments against physicalism (such as Frank Jackson






 
Diaz-Leon, Esa (online). Can phenomenal concepts explain the explanatory gap?   (Google)
Abstract: One of the most important arguments against physicalism is the so-called conceivability argument. Intuitively, this argument claims that since certain statements concerning the separation of the physical and the phenomenal are conceivable, they are possible. This inference from conceivability to possibility has been challenged in numerous ways. One of these ways is the so-called phenomenal concept strategy, which has become one of the main strategies against the conceivability argument. David Chalmers says it “is perhaps the most attractive option for a physicalist to take in responding to the problem of consciousness”.2 Certainly, in the recent years, a multitude of proposals of that sort have been proposed and developed.3 However, Chalmers (2006) has recently argued that no version of the phenomenal concept strategy can succeed. In what follows, I will examine his argument for that conclusion, and I will argue that it is not sound. I will conclude that he has not posed any serious problem for the phenomenal concept strategy to succeed..
 
Diaz-Leon, Esa (2008). Defending the phenomenal concept strategy. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 86 (4):597 – 610.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: One of the main strategies against conceivability arguments is the so-called phenomenal concept strategy, which aims to explain the epistemic gap between physical and phenomenal truths in terms of the special features of phenomenal concepts. Daniel Stoljar has recently argued that the phenomenal concept strategy has failed to provide a successful explanation of this epistemic gap. In this paper my aim is to defend the phenomenal concept strategy from his criticisms. I argue that Stoljar has misrepresented the resources of the strategy, which can indeed accomplish the required explanatory task, once it is properly understood





 
Diaz-Leon, Esa, The conceivability argument against behaviourism and the phenomenal concept strategy.   (Google)
Abstract: The phenomenal concept strategy is one of the most attractive responses to the so-called conceivability arguments. A crucial step in these arguments is the inference from conceivability to possibility. The phenomenal concept strategy attacks this inference from conceivability to possibility: they argue that there is an alternative explanation of the conceivability of zombies, which does not involve the possibility of zombies. This alternative explanation appeals to special features of phenomenal concepts in order to explain the conceivability of zombies. Daniel Stoljar has recently argued that if the phenomenal concept strategy was a good strategy against the conceivability argument against physicalism, it would also be a good strategy against the conceivability argument against behaviourism. But he claims that the latter conceivability argument is sound, and therefore the phenomenal concept strategy cannot be correct. In this paper I show how the phenomenal concept strategy can respond to this objection
 
Francescotti, Robert M. (1994). Qualitative beliefs, wide content, and wide behavior. Noûs 28 (3):396-404.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Fürst, Martina (2004). Qualia and phenomenal concepts as basis of the knowledge argument. Acta Analytica 19 (32):143-152.   (Google)
Abstract: The central attempt of this paper is to explain the underlying intuitions of Frank Jackson’s “Knowledge Argument” that the epistemic gap between phenomenal knowledge and physical knowledge points towards a corresponding ontological gap. The first step of my analysis is the claim that qualia are epistemically special because the acquisition of the phenomenal concept of a quale x requires the experience of x. Arguing what is so special about phenomenal concepts and pointing at the inherence-relation with the qualia they pick out, I give compelling reasons for the existence of ontologically distinct entities. Finally I conclude that phenomenal knowledge is caused by phenomenal properties and the instantiation of these properties is a specific phenomenal fact, which can not be mediated by any form of descriptive information. So it will be shown that phenomenal knowledge must count as the possession of very special information necessarily couched in subjective, phenomenal conceptions
 
Ginet, Carl A. (1968). How words mean kinds of sensations. Philosophical Review 77 (January):3-24.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links) 





 
Goldstein, Irwin (1985). Communication and mental events. American Philosophical Quarterly 22 (October):331-338.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: How do the young learn names for feelings? After criticizing Wittgensteinian explanations, I formulate and defend an explanation very different from Wittgensteinians embrace.
 
Haukioja, Jussi (2008). A defence of the conditional analysis of phenomenal concepts. Philosophical Studies 139 (1).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: A recent strategy for defending physicalism about the mind against the zombie argument relies on the so-called conditional analysis of phenomenal concepts. According to this analysis, what kinds of states our phenomenal concepts refer to depends crucially on whether the actual world is merely physical or not. John Hawthorne, David Braddon-Mitchell and Robert Stalnaker have claimed, independently, that this analysis explains the conceivability of zombies in a way consistent with physicalism, thus blocking the zombie argument. Torin Alter has recently presented three arguments against the conditional analysis strategy. This paper defends the conditional analysis strategy against Alter’s objections






 
Hawthorne, John (2006). Dancing qualia and direct reference. In Torin Alter & Sven Walter (eds.), Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Heal, Jane (ms). Minds, brains, and indexicals.   (Google) 
 
Hellie, Benj (ms). Peacocke's 'Concepts of conscious states'.   (Google) 
 
Hope, V. (1973). Speaking of sensations. Mind 82 (April):183-190.   (Google | More links) 





 
Horgan, Terence E. & Tienson, John L. (2001). Deconstructing new wave materialism. In Carl Gillett & Barry M. Loewer (eds.), Physicalism and its Discontents. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 11 | Google)
Abstract: In the first post World War II identity theories (e.g., Place 1956, Smart 1962), mind brain identities were held to be contingent. However, in work beginning in the late 1960's, Saul Kripke (1971, 1980) convinced the philosophical community that true identity statements involving names and natural kind terms are necessarily true and furthermore, that many such necessary identities can only be known a posteriori. Kripke also offered an explanation of the a posteriori nature of ordinary theoretical identities such as that water = H2O. We identify the kinds and substances involved in theoretical identities by certain of their contingent properties. What we discover when we discover a theoretical identity is the underlying nature of the kind that we identify by those contingent properties. Now, of course, it was being a posteriori, not being contingent, that mattered to the identity theorists anyway, so the necessity of identity is not, in itself, damaging to mind brain identity theories. However, Kripke also argued persuasively that the alleged mind brain identities could not be treated in the same way as ordinary theoretical identities. We "identify" pain by feeling it, and surely how it feels is an essential property of pain, not a contingent property. Thus, a mind body identity theory must provide a different explanation of why its identities are a posteriori. A new wave of materialists has appeared on the scene with a new strategy for explaining [1] the a posteriori nature of its alleged identities. The strategy is to locate the explanation for the a posteriori nature of mind body identities, not on the side of the world, but on the side of the mind -in different ways of thinking about or imagining, or in different concepts. Thus, on this new view, there is only one property—this brain process type, which is identical with this pain..
 
Jakab, Zolt (2000). Ineffability of qualia: A straightforward naturalistic explanation. Consciousness and Cognition 9 (3):329-351.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper I offer an explanation of the ineffability (linguistic inexpressibility) of sensory experiences. My explanation is put in terms of computational functionalism and standard externalist theories of representational content. As I will argue, many or most sensory experiences are representational states without constituent structure. This property determines both the representational function these states can serve and the information that can be extracted from them when they are processed. Sensory experiences can indicate the presence of certain external states of affairs but they cannot convey any more information about them than that. So, format- or code-conversion mechanisms that link different systems of representation (linguistic and perceptual) to each other will fail to extract any relevant information from sensory experiences that could be coded in language. They only way to establish specific roles for sensory experiences in communication and the organization of behavior is to attach to them, by associative links, words, or other behavioral responses. If a sensory experience has no linguistic label associated to it in a particular subject, then no linguistic description can token, or activate, that state in the subject. In other words, no linguistic description can cause a subject to undergo an unlabeled perceptual state. On the contrary, complex, or syntactically structured perceptual states can be built up, on the basis of descriptions, by mechanisms of constructive imagination (conceived here as one sort of format conversion). It is this difference between complex and unstructured representational states that gives us an understanding of the phenomenon we call the ineffability of qualia








 
Knobe, Joshua & Prinz, Jesse J. (2008). Intuitions about consciousness: Experimental studies. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 7 (1):67-83.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: When people are trying to determine whether an entity is capable of having certain kinds of mental states, they can proceed either by thinking about the entity from a *functional* standpoint or by thinking about the entity from a *physical* standpoint. We conducted a series of studies to determine how each of these standpoints impact people’s mental state ascriptions. The results point to a striking asymmetry. It appears that ascriptions of states involving phenomenal consciousness are sensitive to physical factors in a way that ascriptions of other states are not







 
Law, Stephen (2004). Loar's defence of physicalism. Ratio 17 (1):60-67.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Brian Loar believes he has refuted all those antiphysicalist arguments that take as their point of departure observations about what is or isn't conceivable. I argue that there remains an important, popular and plausible-looking form of conceivability argument that Loar has entirely overlooked. Though he may not have realized it, Saul Kripke presents, or comes close to presenting, two fundamentally different forms of conceivability argument. I distinguish the two arguments and point out that while Loar has succeeded in refuting one of Kripke's arguments he has not refuted the other. Loar is mistaken: physicalism still faces an apparently insurmountable conceptual obstacle





 
Levine, Joseph (2006). Conscious awareness and (self-)representation. In Kenneth Williford & Uriah Kriegel (eds.), Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness. The Mit Press.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links) 




 
Levin, Yakir (2004). Criterial semantics and qualia. Facta Philosophica 6 (1):57-76.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Levine, Joseph (2006). Phenomenal concepts and the materialist constraint. In Torin Alter & Sven Walter (eds.), Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Levin, Janet (2006). What is a phenomenal concept? In Torin Alter & Sven Walter (eds.), Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Loar, Brian (1990). Phenomenal states. Philosophical Perspectives 4:81-108.   (Cited by 156 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Loar, Brian (2003). Qualia, properties, modality. Philosophical Issues 1 (1):113-29.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 





 
Ludwig, Pascal (ms). A descriptivist theory of phenomenal concepts.   (Google)
Abstract: The aim of this paper is to put forward an alternative to what I shall call "the received view on phenomenal concepts". According to this view, our concepts of phenomenal states directly refer to these states. I claim, on the contrary, that phenomenal concepts are _descriptive, indirect_ _and_ _relational_. More precisely, I endorse a descriptivist analysis according to which phenomenal concepts are descriptive concepts having perceptual demonstratives as constituents. I introduce and discuss two distinctions: the distinction between the perceptible properties of objects and the qualitative characters of experiences on the one hand, and the corresponding distinction between perceptual demonstratives of perceptible properties and phenomenal concepts on the other. I then proceed as follows. Firstly, I state the main motivations behind the received view. Then, I try to show that every argument that can be advanced in favor of the received view is either powerless against my descriptivist position, or can be re-interpreted as an argument supporting it. In particular, I argue to the effect that some of the main motivations which are usually taken for granted when accepting the received view rest upon a fallacy, which I call the
 
Macdonald, C. (2004). Mary meets Molyneux: The explanatory gap and the individuation of phenomenal concepts. Noûs 38 (3):503-24.   (Google | More links) 





 
Mandik, Pete (2010). Swamp Mary's revenge: Deviant phenomenal knowledge and physicalism. Philosophical Studies 148 (2).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Deviant phenomenal knowledge is knowing what it’s like to have experiences of, e.g., red without actually having had experiences of red. Such a knower is a deviant. Some physicalists have argued and some anti-physicalists have denied that the possibility of deviants undermines anti-physicalism and the Knowledge Argument. The current paper presents new arguments defending the deviant-based attacks on anti-physicalism. Central to my arguments are considerations concerning the psychosemantic underpinnings of deviant phenomenal knowledge. I argue that physicalists are in a superior position to account for the conditions in virtue of which states of deviants constitute representations of phenomenal facts





 
Marsh, Leslie (2005). Review essay: Dennett's sweet dreams philosophical obstacles to a science of consciousness. Marsh, Leslie (2005) Review Essay.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Review Essay: Dennett’s Sweet Dreams Philosophical Obstacles to a Science of Consciousness





 
McLaughlin, Brian P. (2001). In defense of new wave materialism: A response to Horgan and Tienson. In Carl Gillett & Barry M. Loewer (eds.), Physicalism and its Discontents. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 14 | Google) 
 
Mole, Christopher (ms). Supervaluation for Papineau's phenomenal concepts.   (Google) 
 
Nida-Rumelin, Martine (2006). Grasping phenomenal properties. In Torin Alter & Sven Walter (eds.), Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: 1 Grasping Properties I will present an argument for property dualism. The argument employs a distinction between having a concept of a property and grasping a property via a concept. If you grasp a property P via a concept C, then C is a concept of P. But the reverse does not hold: you may have a concept of a property without grasping that property via any concept. If you grasp a property, then your cognitive relation to that property is more intimate then if you just have some concept or other of that property. To grasp a property is to understand what having that property essentially consists in
 
Nida-Rumelin, Martine (1997). On belief about experiences: An epistemological distinction applied to the knowledge argument. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 58 (1):51-73.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links) 




 
Nida-Rumelin, Martine (2006). Phenomenal belief and phenomenal concepts. In Manuel Garcia-Carpintero & Maci (eds.), Two-Dimensional Semantics. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Nida-R,  (2006). Phenomenal belief, phenomenal concepts, and phenomenal properties in a two-dimensional framework. In Garc (ed.), Two-Dimensional Semantics. Oxford: Clarendon Press.   (Google) 
 
Nida-Rumelin, Martine (1995). What Mary couldn't know: Belief about phenomenal states. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Ferdinand Schoningh.   (Cited by 15 | Annotation | Google)




  
O'Dea, John (2002). The indexical nature of sensory concepts. Philosophical Papers 32 (2):169-181.   (Google)
Abstract: This paper advances the thesis that sensory concepts have as a semantic component the first person indexical.
 
Pagin, Peter (2000). Sensation terms. Dialectica 54 (3):177-99.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Are sensation ascriptions descriptive, even in the first person present tense? Do sensation terms refer to, denote, sensations, so that truth and falsity of sensation ascriptions depend on the properties of the denoted sensations? That is, do sensation terms have a denotational semantics? As I understand it, this is denied by Wittgenstein. Wittgenstein rejects the idea of a denotational semantics for public language sensation terms, such as





 
Papineau, David (2002). Introduction to Thinking About Consciousness. In Thinking About Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Papineau, David (2006). Phenomenal and perceptual concepts. In Torin Alter & Sven Walter (eds.), Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 8 | Google | More links)
Abstract: 1 Introduction 2 Perceptual Concepts 2.1 Perceptual Concepts are not Demonstrative 2.2 Perceptual Concepts as Stored Templates 2.3 Perceptual Semantics 2.4 Perceptually Derived Concepts 3 Phenomenal Concepts





 
Prinz, Jesse (2007). Mental pointing: Phenomenal knowledge without concepts. Journal of Consciousness Studies 14 (9-10):184-211.   (Google | More links) 





 
Raffman, Diana (1995). On the persistence of phenomenology. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Ferdinand Schoningh.   (Cited by 53 | Annotation | Google)





Abstract: In Thomas Metzinger, Conscious Experience, Schoningh Verlag. 1995. [ online ]
 
Raffman, Diana (2005). Some thoughts about Thinking About Consciousness. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 71 (1):163-170.   (Google | More links) 





 
Schick, Theodore W. (1989). The semantic role of qualitative content. Southern Journal of Philosophy 27:125-133.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Schroer, Robert (forthcoming). Where's the Beef? Phenomenal Concepts as both Demonstrative and Substantial. The Australasian Journal of Philosophy.   (Google)
Abstract: One popular materialist response to the explanatory gap identifies phenomenal concepts with type-demonstrative concepts. This kind of response, however, faces a serious challenge: Our phenomenal concepts seem to provide a richer characterization of their referents than just the demonstrative characterization of ‘that quality’. In this paper, I develop a materialist account that beefs up the contents of phenomenal concepts while retaining the idea that these contents contain demonstrative elements. I illustrate this account by focusing on our phenomenal concepts of phenomenal colour. The phenomenal colours stand in a similarity space relative to one another in virtue of being complex qualities—qualities that contain saturation, lightness, and various aspects of hue as component elements. Our phenomenal concepts, in turn, provide a demonstrative characterization of each of these component elements as well as a description of how much of that element is present in a given phenomenal colour. The result is an account where phenomenal concepts contain demonstrative elements and yet provide a significantly richer characterization of the intrinsic nature of their referents than just ‘that quality’.
 
Stoljar, Daniel (2005). Physicalism and phenomenal concepts. Mind and Language 20 (2):296-302.   (Cited by 9 | Google | More links)
Abstract: A phenomenal concept is the concept of a particular type of sensory or perceptual experience, where the notion of experience is understood phenomenologically. A recent and increasingly influential idea in philosophy of mind suggests that reflection on these concepts will play a major role in the debate about conscious experience, and in particular in the defense of physicalism, the thesis that psychological truths supervene on physical truths. According to this idea






 
Sturgeon, Scott (1999). Conceptual gaps and odd possibilities. Mind 108 (430):377-380.   (Google | More links) 





 
Sturgeon, Scott (2008). Stalnaker on sensuous knowledge. Philosophical Studies 137 (2).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Robert Stalnaker has recently argued that a pair of natural thoughts are incompatible. One of them is the view that items of non-indexical factual knowledge rule out possibilities. The other is the view that knowing what sensuous experience is like involves non-indexical knowledge of its phenomenal character. I argue against Stalnaker’s take on things, elucidating along the way how our knowledge of what experience is like fits together with the natural idea that items of non-indexical factual knowledge rule out possibilities





 
Sundström, Pär (2008). Is the mystery an illusion? Papineau on the problem of consciousness. Synthese 163 (2).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: A number of philosophers have recently argued that (i) consciousness properties are identical with some set of physical or functional properties and that (ii) we can explain away the frequently felt puzzlement about this claim as a delusion or confusion generated by our different ways of apprehending or thinking about consciousness. This paper examines David Papineau’s influential version of this view. According to Papineau, the difference between our “phenomenal” and “material” concepts of consciousness produces an instinctive but erroneous intuition that these concepts can’t co-refer. I claim that this account fails. To begin with, it is arguable that we are mystified about physicalism even when the account predicts that we shouldn’t be. Further, and worse, the account predicts that an “intuition of distinctness” will arise in cases where it clearly does not. In conclusion, I make some remarks on the prospects for, constraints on, and (physicalist) alternatives to, a successful defence of the claim (ii)






 
Thornton, Mark T. (1972). Ostensive terms and materialism. The Monist 56 (April):193-214.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Tye, Michael (2003). A theory of phenomenal concepts. In Anthony O'Hear (ed.), Minds and Persons. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 5 | Google)
Abstract: 1) There is widespread agreement that consciousness must be a physical phenomenon, even if it is one that we do not yet understand and perhaps may never do so fully. There is also widespread agreement that the way to defend physicalism about consciousness against a variety of well known objections is by appeal to phenomenal concepts (Loar 1990, Lycan 1996, Papineau 1993, Sturgeon 1994, Tye 1995, 2000, Perry 2001) . There is, alas, no agreement on the nature of phenomenal concepts
 
Unger, Peter K. (1966). On experience and the development of the understanding. American Philosophical Quarterly 3 (January):48-56.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Whiteley, C. H. (1956). Meaning and ostensive definition. Mind 65 (July):332-335.   (Google | More links) 





 
White, Stephen L. (2006). Property dualism, phenomenal concepts, and the semantic premise. In Torin Alter & Sven Walter (eds.), Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Yablo, Stephen (ms). Grokking pain.   (Google) 
 
1.5g Consciousness and Content, Misc




Atran, Scott & Norenzayan, Ara (2004). Why minds create gods: Devotion, deception, death, and arational decision making. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 27 (6):754-770.   (Google)
Abstract: The evolutionary landscape that canalizes human thought and behavior into religious beliefs and practices includes naturally selected emotions, cognitive modules, and constraints on social interactions. Evolutionary by-products, including metacognitive awareness of death and possibilities for deception, further channel people into religious paths. Religion represents a community's costly commitment to a counterintuitive world of supernatural agents who manage people's existential anxieties. Religious devotion, though not an adaptation, informs all cultures and most people
 
Barresi, John (2004). Intentionality, consciousness and intentional relations: From constitutive phenomenology to cognitive science. In L. Embree (ed.), Gurwitsch's Relevance for Cognitive Science. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.   (Google)
Abstract: In this chapter I look closely at the intentionality of consciousness from a naturalistic perspective. I begin with a consideration of Gurwitsch's suggestive ideas about the role of acts of consciousness in constituting both the objects and the subjects of consciousness. I turn next to a discussion of how these ideas relate to my own empirical approach to intentional relations seen from a developmental perspective. This is followed by a discussion of some recent ideas in philosophical cognitive science on the intentionality of consciousness, both with respect to the objects and the subjects of consciousness. I show that these recent trends tend to naturalize intentionality and consciousness in directions compatible with the descriptive aspects of Gurwitsch's constitutive phenomenology
 
Bayne, Tim, Perceptual experience and the reach of phenomenal content.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The phenomenal character of perceptual experience involves the representation of colour, spatial and temporal properties, but does it also involve the representation of high-level categories? Is the recognition of an object as a tomato encoded in the phenomenology of perception? Proponents of a conservative view of the reach of phenomenal content say “no”, whereas those who take a liberal view of perceptual phenomenology say “yes”. This paper clarifies the debate between conservatives and liberals, and provides a case in favour of the liberal position: high-level content can inform perceptual phenomenology





 
Binns, Peter (1995). Commentary on contentless consciousness. Philosophy, Psychiatry, and Psychology 2 (1):61-63.   (Google) 
 
Burge, Tyler (1991). Vision and intentional content. In Ernest LePore & Robert Van Gulick (eds.), John Searle and His Critics. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Cam, Philip (1984). Consciousness and content-formation. Inquiry 27 (December):381-98.   (Cited by 34 | Google) 
 
Campbell, John (web). Consciousness and reference. In Brian McLaughlin & Ansgar Beckermann (eds.), Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Mind. Oxford University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: Suppose your conscious life were surgically excised, but everything else left intact, what would you miss? In this situation you would not have the slightest idea what was going on. You would have no idea what there is in the world around you; what the grounds are of the potentialities and threats are that you are negotiating. Experience of your surroundings provides you with knowledge of what is there: with your initial base of knowledge of what the things are that you are thinking and talking about. But this connection between consciousness of the objects and properties around you, and knowledge of the references of the basic terms you use, has proven difficult to articulate. The connection cannot be recognized so long as you think of consciousness as a kind of glow with which representations are accompanied or enlivened. It is, though, also possible to think of perceptual experience as fundamentally a relation between the subject and the things experienced; and given such a conception, we can make visible the link between consciousness and reference
 
Campbell, J. (2002). Reference and Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 81 | Google | More links)
Abstract: John Campbell investigates how consciousness of the world explains our ability to think about the world; how our ability to think about objects we can see depends on our capacity for conscious visual attention to those things. He illuminates classical problems about thought, reference, and experience by looking at the underlying psychological mechanisms on which conscious attention depends






 
Chalmers, David J. (online). Consciousness and cognition.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: *[[I wrote this paper in January of 1990, but did not publish it because I was never entirely happy with it. My ideas on consciousness were in a state of flux, ultimately evolving into those represented in my book _The Conscious Mind_ (Oxford University Press, 1996). I now think that some parts of this paper are unsatisfactory, especially the positive theory outlined at the end, although a successor to that theory is laid out in the book. Nevertheless, I think the paper raises issues that need to be addressed. ]]






 
Crane, Tim (1997). Galen Strawson on mental reality. Ratio 10 (1):82-90.   (Google | More links) 





 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1968). Content and Consciousness. Routledge.   (Cited by 351 | Google | More links) 










 
Drummond, John (2008). Moral phenomenology and moral intentionality. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 7 (1):35-49.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper distinguishes between two senses of the term “phenomenology”: a narrow sense (drawn from Nagel) and a broader sense (drawn from Husserl). It claims, with particular reference to the moral sphere, that the narrow meaning of moral phenomenology cannot stand alone, that is, that moral phenomenology in the narrow sense entails moral intentionality. The paper proceeds by examining different examples of the axiological and volitional experiences of both virtuous and dutiful agents, and it notes the correlation between the phenomenal and intentional differences belonging to these experiences. The paper concludes with some reflections on how the focus on the broader sense of “phenomenology” serves to provide a more precise sense of what we might mean by “moral phenomenology.”






 
Falk, Barrie (1993). Consciousness, cognition, and the phenomenal. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 67 (67):55-73.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Fetzer, James H. (2003). Consciousness and cognition: Semiotic conceptions of bodies and minds. In Quentin Smith & Aleksandar Jokic (eds.), Consciousness: New Philosophical Perspectives. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Fox, Ivan (1989). On the nature and cognitive function of phenomenal content -- part one. Philosophical Topics 17 (1):81-103.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Georgalis, N. (2006). Representation and the first-person perspective. Synthese 150 (2):281-325.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The orthodox view in the study of representation is that a strictly third-person objective methodology must be employed. The acceptance of this methodology is shown to be a fundamental and debilitating error. Toward this end I defend what I call







 
Glicksohn, Joseph (1998). States of consciousness and symbolic cognition. Journal of Mind and Behavior 19 (2):105-118.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Greenberg, Jeff; Sullivan, Daniel; Kosloff, Spee & Solomon, Sheldon (2006). Souls do not live by cognitive inclinations alone, but by the desire to exist beyond death as well. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 29 (5):474-475.   (Google)
Abstract: Bering's analysis is inadequate because it fails to consider past and present adult soul beliefs and the psychological functions they serve. We suggest that a valid folk psychology of souls must consider features of adult soul beliefs, the unique problem engendered by awareness of death, and terror management findings, in addition to cognitive inclinations toward dualistic and teleological thinking
 
Hart, James G. (1998). Intentionality, phenomenality, and light. In Self-Awareness, Temporality, and Alterity. Dordrecht: Kluwer.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Heal, Jane (1998). Consciousness and content. In Anthony O'Hear (ed.), Contemporary Issues in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge University Press.   (Google) 
 
Katsafanas, Paul (2005). Nietzsche's theory of mind: Consciousness and conceptualization. European Journal of Philosophy 13 (1):1–31.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: I show that Nietzsche's puzzling and seemingly inconsistent claims about consciousness constitute a coherent and philosophically fruitful theory. Drawing on some ideas from Schopenhauer and F.A. Lange, Nietzsche argues that conscious mental states are mental states with conceptually articulated content, whereas unconscious mental states are mental states with non-conceptually articulated content. Nietzsche's views on concepts imply that conceptually articulated mental states will be superficial and in some cases distorting analogues of non-conceptually articulated mental states. Thus, the claim that conscious states have a conceptual articulation renders comprehensible Nietzsche's claim that consciousness is "superficial" and "falsifying."





 
Kohler, Wolfgang (1929). An old pseudoproblem. Die Naturwissenschaften 17:395-401.   (Google) 
 
Lee, Harold N. (1985). A semiotic-pragmatic theory of consciousness. Southern Journal of Philosophy 23:217-228.   (Google) 
 
Loar, Brian (2003). Transparent experience and the availability of qualia. In Quentin Smith & Aleksandar Jokic (eds.), Consciousness: New Philosophical Perspectives. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 17 | Google) 
 
Maloney, J. Christopher (1986). Sensuous content. Philosophical Papers 15 (November):131-54.   (Google) 
 
Mazis, Glen (2008). Humans, Animals, Machines: Blurring Boundaries. State University of New York.   (Google) 
 
McGinn, Colin (1988). Consciousness and content. Proceedings of the British Academy 74:219-39.   (Cited by 16 | Annotation | Google)




  
McGinn, Colin (2006). Hard questions - comments on Galen Strawson. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11):90-99.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: I find myself in agreement with almost all of Galen's paper (Strawson, 2006) -- except, that is, for his three main claims. These I take to be: that he has provided a substantive and useful definition of 'physicalism'; that physicalism entails panpsychism; and that panpsychism is a necessary and viable doctrine. But I find much to applaud in the incidentals Galen brings in to defend these three claims, particularly his eloquent and uncompromising rejection of the idea of brute emergence, as well as his dissatisfaction with standard forms of physicalism. I certainly find his paper far more on target than most of the stuff I read on this topic





 
McIntyre, Ronald & Smith, David Woodruff (1989). Theory of intentionality. In William R. McKenna & J. N. Mohanty (eds.), Husserl's Phenomenology: A Textbook. University Press of America.   (Google)
Abstract: §1. Intentionality; §2. Husserl's Phenomenological Conception of Intentionality; §3. The Distinction between Content and Object; §4. Husserl's Theory of Content: Noesis and Noema; §5. Noema and Object; §6. The Sensory Content of Perception; §7. The Internal Structure of Noematic Sinne; §8. Noema and Horizon; §9. Horizon and Background Beliefs
 
Nelkin, Norton (1994). Phenomena and representation. Philosophy of Science 45 (2):527-47.   (Cited by 7 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 







 
O'Brien, Gerard & Opie, Jonathan (1997). Cognitive science and phenomenal consciousness: A dilemma, and how to avoid it. Philosophical Psychology 10 (3):269-86.   (Cited by 8 | Google | More links)
Abstract: When it comes to applying computational theory to the problem of phenomenal consciousness, cognitive scientists appear to face a dilemma. The only strategy that seems to be available is one that explains consciousness in terms of special kinds of computational processes. But such theories, while they dominate the field, have counter-intuitive consequences; in particular, they force one to accept that phenomenal experience is composed of information processing effects. For cognitive scientists, therefore, it seems to come down to a choice between a counter-intuitive theory or no theory at all. We offer a way out of this dilemma. We argue that the computational theory of mind doesn't force cognitive scientists to explain consciousness in terms of computational processes, as there is an alternative strategy available: one that focuses on the representational vehicles that encode information in the brain. This alternative approach to consciousness allows us to do justice to the standard intuitions about phenomenal experience, yet remain within the confines of cognitive science








 
Prado, C. G. (1977). Reference and consciousness. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 55 (May):22-26.   (Google | More links) 







 
Shoemaker, Sydney (2000). Phenomenal character revisited. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 60 (2):465-467.   (Cited by 11 | Google | More links) 





 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1994). The phenomenal character of experience. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 54 (2).   (Google) 
 
Stich, Stephen P. (1981). On the relation between occurrents and contentful mental states. Inquiry 24 (October):353-358.   (Google) 
 
Strawson, Galen (1998). Replies to Noam Chomsky, Pierre Jacob, Michael Smith, and Paul Snowdon. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 63 (2):461-486.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 




 
Strawson, Galen (2003). What is the relation between an experience, the subject of the experience, and the content of the experience? Philosophical Issues 13 (1):279-315.   (Cited by 9 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This version of this paper has been superseded by a substantially revised version in G. Strawson, Real Materialism and Other Essays (OUP 2008) I take 'content' in a natural internalist way to refer to occurrent mental content. I introduce a 'thin' or ‘live’ notion of the subject according to which a subject of experience cannot exist unless there is an experience for it to be the subject of. I then argue, first, that in the case of a particular experience E, its content C, and its (thin) subject S, [C ↔ E ↔ S]; and, second, that the metaphysical fact that underlies this (strong modal) equivalence is in fact identity: [E = S = C]. I suggest that the effort of thought required to grasp this is deeply revealing of the nature of reality. On the way I raise a doubt about the viability of the traditional object/property distinction. 





 
Sullivan, Philip R. (1995). Contentless consciousness and information-processing theories of mind. Philosophy, Psychiatry, and Psychology 2 (1):51-59.   (Google) 
 
Sundstrom, Par (2002). An argument against spectrum inversion. In Sten Lindstrom & Par Sundstrom (eds.), Physicalism, Consciousness, and Modality: Essays in the Philosophy of Mind.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Sundström, Pär (2004). Lessons for Mary. In Marek and Reicher (ed.), Experience and Analysis: Papers of the 27th International Wittgenstein Symposium. The Austrian Ludwig Wittgenstein Society.   (Google) 
 
Thau, Michael (2002). Consciousness and Cognition. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 98 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This book maintains that our conception of consciousness and cognition begins with and depends upon a few fundamental errors. Thau elucidates these errors by discussing three important philosophical puzzles - Spectrum Inversion, Frege's Puzzle, and Black-and-White Mary - each of which concerns some aspect of either consciousness or cognition. He argues that it has gone unnoticed that each of these puzzles presents the very same problem and, in bringing this commonality to light, the errors in our natural conception of consciousness and cognition are also reviewed







 
Tye, Michael (2009). Consciousness Revisited: Materialism Without Phenomenal Concepts. Mit Press.   (Google)
Abstract: Introduction -- Phenomenal consciousness -- Phenomenal consciousness and self-representation -- The connection between phenomenal consciousness and creature consciousness -- Consciousness of things -- Real world puzzle cases -- Why consciousness cannot be physical and why it must be -- What is the thesis of physicalism? -- Why consciousness cannot be physical -- Why consciousness must be physical -- Physicalism and the appeal to phenomenal concepts -- Some terminological points -- Why physicalists appeal to phenomenal concepts -- Various accounts of phenomenal concepts -- My own earlier view on phenomenal concepts -- Are there any phenomenal concepts? -- Phenomenal concepts and burgean intuitions -- Consequences for a priori physicalism -- The admissible contents of visual experience : the existential thesis -- The singular (when filled) thesis -- Kaplanianism -- The multiple contents thesis -- The existential thesis revisited -- Still more on existential contents -- Consciousness, seeing and knowing -- Knowing things and knowing facts -- Nonconceptual content -- Why the phenomenal character of an experience is not one of its nonrepresentational properties -- Phenomenal character and representational content, part I -- Phenomenal character and representational content, part II -- Phenomenal character and our knowledge of it -- Solving the puzzles -- Mary, Mary, how does your knowledge grow? -- The explanatory gap -- The hard problem -- The possibility of zombies -- Change blindness and the refrigerator light illusion -- A closer look at the change blindness hypotheses -- The no-seeum view -- Sperling and the refrigerator light -- Phenomenology and cognitive accessibility -- A further change blindness experiment -- Another brick in the wall -- Privileged access, phenomenal character, and externalism -- The threat to privileged access -- A Burgean thought experiment -- Social externalism for phenomenal character? -- A closer look at privileged access and incorrigibility -- How do I know that I am not a zombie? -- Phenomenal externalism.
 
1.6 Aspects of Consciousness




Bachmann, Talis (1998). Is conscious experience established instantaneously? Commentary on J.g. Taylor. Consciousness and Cognition 7 (2):149-156.   (Google | More links) 





 
Dods, John Bovee (1850). The Philosophy of Electrical Psychology. Da Capo Press.   (Google) 
 
1.6a Self-Consciousness




Agrawal, M. M. (1988). Sartre on pre-reflective consciousness. Journal of Indian Council of Philosophical Research (September-December) 121 (September-December):121-127.   (Google) 
 
Anderson, Michael L. & Perlis, Donald R. (2005). The roots of self-awareness. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 4 (3):297-333.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper we provide an account of the structural underpinnings of self-awareness. We offer both an abstract, logical account











 
Anscombe, G. E. M. (1975). The first person. In Samuel D. Guttenplan (ed.), Mind and Language. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 61 | Google) 
 
Balaban, Oded (1990). Subject and Consciousness: A Philosophical Inquiry Into Self-Consciousness. Rowman & Littlefield.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: Title on spine: Subject & consciousness.
 
Bartlett, Edward T. (1988). Consciousness, self-consciousness, and sensory deprivation. Philosophy Research Archives 13:489-497.   (Google) 
 
Bartlett, Edward T. (1983). The subjectlessness of self-consciousness. Philosophy Research Archives 9:675-682.   (Google) 
 
Bayne, Tim & Pacherie, Elisabeth (forthcoming). Narrators and comparators: The architecture of agentive self-awareness. Synthese.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper contrasts two approaches to agentive self-awareness: a high-level, narrative-based account, and a low-level comparator-based account. We argue that an agent’s narrative self-conception has a role to play in explaining their agentive judgments, but that agentive experiences are explained by low-level comparator mechanisms that are grounded in the very machinery responsible for action-production





 
Bealer, George (1997). Self-consciousness. Philosophical Review 106 (1):69-117.   (Cited by 11 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Self-consciousness constitutes an insurmountable obstacle to functionalism. Either the standard functional definitions of mental relations wrongly require the contents of self-consciousness to be propositions involving








 
Beckermann, Ansgar (2003). Self-consciousness in cognitive systems. Schriftenreihe-Wittgenstein Gesellschaft 31:174-188.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Dualism, but he seems at least to have acknowledged the possibility that Descartes might be right on this issue, i.e., that the real self is a _res cogitans_. Maybe this is why talk of






 
Berm,  (2003). 'I'- and explanation: Reply to Garrett. Philosophical Quarterly 53 (212):432-436.   (Google) 
 
Bermudez, Jose Luis (2001). Nonconceptual self-consciousness and cognitive science. Synthese 129 (1):129-149.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 






 
Bermudez, Jose Luis (2000). Nonconceptual self-awareness and the paradox of self-consciousness. In Albert Newen & Kai Vogeley (eds.), Selbst und Gehirn. Menschliches Selbstbewusstsein und seine Neurobiologischen Grundlagen. Mentis.   (Google) 
 
Bermudez, Jose Luis (1999). Precis of The Paradox of Self-Consciousness. Psycoloquy 10 (35).   (Cited by 13 | Google) 
 
Bermudez, Jose Luis (1997). Reduction and the self. Journal of Consciousness Studies 4 (4-5):458-66.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Berm,  (2007). Self-consciousness. In Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Bermudez, Jose Luis (2002). Sources of self-consciousness: Epistemic and genetic. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 102:87-107.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 









 
Bermudez, Jose Luis (1998). The Paradox of Self-Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Cited by 215 | Google | More links) 






 
Bermudez, Jose Luis (2001). The sources of self-consciousness. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 102 (1):87-107.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 











 
Bickle, John (2003). Empirical evidence for a narrative concept of self. In Gary D. Fireman, T. E. McVay & Owen J. Flanagan (eds.), Narrative and Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 




 
Breeur, Roland (2003). Consciousness and the self. International Journal of Philosophical Studies 11 (4):415-436.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: With his notion of absolute consciousness, Sartre tries to rethink the relation between consciousness and the self. What is the origin of subjectivity in relation to a consciousness that is characterized as impersonal and as a radical lucidity? In this article, I attempt to question that origin and the nature as such of the subject in its relation to a consciousness that in its essence is not yet subjective. On the contrary, it is characterized by a selfpresence that is so radical that it threatens every form of self-knowledge







 
Brewer, Bill (1992). Self-location and agency. Mind 101 (401):17-34.   (Cited by 13 | Google | More links)
Abstract: We perceive things in the external world as spatially located both with respect to each other and to ourselves, such that they are in principle accessible from where we seem to be. I hear the door bang behind me; I feel the pen on the desk over to my right; and I see you walking beneath the line of pictures, from left to right in front of me. By displaying these spatial relations between its objects and us, the perceivers, perception places us in the perceived world: our world and the world we perceive are one. Clearly this is not achieved by our continually perceiving ourselves along with the things around us, and thus recovering our position with respect to them. Indeed I shall argue that there are serious difficulties with the suggestion that this might be the basic mechanism for perceptual self- location. Furthermore, I shall argue that our existence as an element of the objective order cannot be inferred from the raw given in sense perception. Hence it cannot even be on the right lines as an answer to the question 'What is it for perception to represent its objects as environmental to the subject?', that it should present these objects, along with the perceiving subject himself, or along with something from which his existence in the perceived world could be deduced, in the very same frame so to speak. Nevertheless it yields him an awareness of himself as there in the wings of that scene, genuinely located with respect to the action, yet somehow not normally quite getting onto the stage. And I shall argue here, that perceptual contents succeed in being self-locating in this way in..







 
Brinkmann, Klaus (2005). Consciousness, self-consciousness, and the modern self. History of the Human Sciences 18 (4):27-48.   (Google) 
 
Brinck, Ingar (1998). Self-identification and self-reference. Electronic Journal of Analytic Philosophy 6.   (Google)
Abstract: [1] To know who one is, and also know whether one's experiences really belong to oneself, do not normally present any problem. It nevertheless happens that people do not recognise themselves as they walk by a mirror or do not understand that they fit some particular description. But there are situations in which it really seems impossible to be wrong about oneself. Of that, Ludwig Wittgenstein once wrote: 
It is possible that, say in an accident, I should feel pain in my arm, see a broken arm at
 my side, and think it is mine, when really it is my neighbour's. And I could, looking into
 a mirror, mistake a bump on his forehead for one on mine. On the other hand there is
 no question of recognising a person when I say I have toothache.... it is as impossible
 that in making the statement "I have toothache" I should have mistaken another
 person for myself, as it is to moan with pain by mistake, having mistaken someone
 else for me. (1958: 67) 
In the passage in which this remark is found, Wittgenstein distinguishes between two kinds of use of "I". The first use, as object, as in "I have broken my arm" or "The wind is blowing in my hair", he holds, involves the recognition of a particular person, and there is the possibility of error as concerns the identity of the person. In the other use, as subject, as in "I think it will rain" or "I am trying to lift my arm", no person is recognised. No mistake can be made about who the subject is 
Brook, Andrew (ms). Externalism and the varieties of self-awareness.   (Google)
Abstract: Externalism is the view that some crucial element in the content of our representational states is outside of not just the states whose content they are but even the person who has those states. If so, the contents of such states (and, many hold, the states themselves) do not supervene on anything local to the person whose has them. There are a number of different candidates for what that element is: function (Dretske), causal connection (Putnam, Kripke, Fodor), and social context (Davidson). (Burge has foot in both the causal connection and the social context camps and Dennett fits in here somewhere, too.) This diversity will turn out to be important. The paper starts with Dretske but gets to other varieties of
 
Brook, Andrew (2001). Kant, self-awareness, and self-reference. In Andrew Brook & R. DeVidi (eds.), Self-Reference and Self-Awareness. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Brook, Andrew & DeVidi, R. (eds.) (2001). Self-Reference and Self-Awareness. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 






 
Bryant, Sophie (1897). Variety of extent, degree and unity in self-consciousness. Mind 6 (21):71-89.   (Google | More links) 





 
Campbell, J. (1994). Past, Space, and Self. MIT Press.   (Cited by 129 | Google)
Abstract: In this book John Campbell shows that the general structural features of human thought can be seen as having their source in the distinctive ways in which we...
 
Campbell, J. (1995). The body image and self-consciousness. In Jose Luis Bermudez, Anthony J. Marcel & Naomi M. Eilan (eds.), The Body and the Self. MIT Press.   (Cited by 12 | Google | More links)
Abstract: in N. Eilan, A. Marcel and J. Bermudez (eds.), The Body and the Self (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press 1995), 29-42





 
Canfield, John V. (1990). The Looking-Glass Self: An Examination of Self-Awareness. Praeger.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Carruthers, Glenn (forthcoming). A problem for Wegner and colleagues' model of the sense of agency. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences.   (Google)
Abstract: The sense of agency, that is the sense that one is the agent of one’s bodily actions, is one component of our self-consciousness. Recently, Wegner and colleagues have developed a model of the causal history of this sense. Their model takes it that the sense of agency is elicited for an action when one infers that one or other of one’s mental states caused that action. In their terms, the sense of agency is elicited by the inference to apparent mental state causation. Here, I argue that this model is inconsistent with data from developmental psychology that suggests children can identify the agent behind an action without being capable of understanding the relationship between their intentions and actions. Furthermore, I argue that this model is inconsistent with the preserved sense of agency in autism. In general, the problem is that there are cases where subjects can experience themselves as the agent behind their actions despite lacking the resources to make the inference to apparent mental state causation
 
Carruthers, Glenn (2009). Commentary on Synofzik, Vosgerau and Newen. Consciousness and Cognition 18:515 - 520.   (Google)
Abstract: Synofzik, Vosgerau, and Newen (2008) offer a powerful explanation of the sense of agency. To argue for their model they attempt to show that one of the standard models (the comparator model) fails to explain the sense of agency and that their model offers a more general account than is aimed at by the standard model. Here I offer comment on both parts of this argument. I offer an alternative reading of some of the data they use to argue against the comparator model. I argue that contrary to Synofzik, Vosgerau and Newen’s reading the case of G.L. supports rather than contradicts the comparator model. Next I suggest how the comparator model can differentiate failures of action attribution in patients suffering parietal lobe lesions and delusions of alien control. I also argue that the apparently unexpected phenomenon of ‘‘hyperassociation” is predicted by the comparator model. Finally I suggest that as it stands Synofzik, Vosgerau and Newen’s model is not well specified enough to explain deficits in the sense of agency associated with delusions of thought insertion. Thus they have not met their second argumentative burden of showing how their model is more general than the comparator model.
 
Carruthers, Glenn (forthcoming). The case for the comparator model as an explanation of the sense of agency and its breakdowns. Consciousness and Cognition.   (Google)
Abstract: I compare Frith and colleagues’ influential comparator account of how the sense of agency is elicited to the multifactorial weighting model advocated by Synofzik and colleagues. I defend the comparator model from the common objection that the actual sensory consequences of action are not needed to elicit the sense of agency. I examine the comparator model’s ability to explain the performance of healthy subjects and those suffering from delusions of alien control on various self-attribution tasks. It transpires that the comparator model needs case-by-case adjustment to deal with problematic data. In response to this, the multifactorial weighting model of Synofzik and colleagues is introduced. Although this model is incomplete, it is more naturally constrained by the cases that are problematic for the comparator model. However, this model may be untestable. I conclude that currently the comparator model approach has stronger support than the multifactorial weighting model approach.
 
Castaneda, Hector-Neri (1966). 'He': A study in the logic of self-consciousness. Ratio 8 (December):130-57.   (Cited by 113 | Google) 
 
Castaneda, Hector-Neri (1979). Philosophical method and direct awareness of the self. Grazer Philosophische Studien 8:1-58.   (Google) 
 
Cassam, Quassim (1997). Self and World. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 34 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Self and World is an exploration of the nature of self-awareness. Cassam rejects the widespread view that the self eludes introspection, and argues that consciousness of our thoughts and experiences involves a sense of our thinking, experiencing selves as shaped, solid, and located physical objects in a world of such objects. This clear, original, and challenging treatment of one of the deepest of intellectual problems will demand the attention of all philosophers and cognitive scientists who are concerned with the self





 
Castaneda, Hector-Neri (1989). The reflexivity of self-consciousness: Sameness/identity, data for artificial intelligence. Philosophical Topics 17 (1):27-58.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Cassam, Quassim (1995). Transcendental Self-Consciousness. In P. Kumar (ed.), The Philosophy of P. F. Strawson. Indian Council for Philosophical Research.   (Google) 
 
Chisholm, Roderick M. (1965). Notes on the awareness of the self. The Monist 49 (January):28-35.   (Google) 
 
Chisholm, Roderick M. (1969). On the observability of the self. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 30 (September):7-21.   (Cited by 14 | Google | More links) 





 
Christofidou, Andrea (2000). Self-consciousness and the double immunity. Philosophy 75 (294):539-570.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: It is accepted that first-person thoughts are immune to error through misidentification. I argue that there is also immunity to error through misascription, failure to recognise which has resulted in mistaken claims that first-person thoughts involving the self-ascription of bodily states are, at best, circumstantially immune to error through misidentification relative to






 
Church, Jennifer (1990). Judgment, self-consciousness, and object-independence. American Philosophical Quarterly 27 (1):51-60.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Clark, Romane L. (1988). Self knowledge and self consciousness: Thoughts about oneself. Topoi 7 (March):47-55.   (Google | More links) 




 
Carruthers, Glenn (2009). Commentary on Synofzik, Vosgerau and Newen 2008. Consciousness and Cognition 18 (2):515-520.   (Google)
Abstract: Synofzik, Vosgerau, and Newen (2008) offer a powerful explanation of the sense of agency. To argue for their model they attempt to show that one of the standard models (the comparator model) fails to explain the sense of agency and that their model offers a more general account than is aimed at by the standard model. Here I offer comment on both parts of this argument. I offer an alternative reading of some of the data they use to argue against the comparator model. I argue that contrary to Synofzik, Vosgerau and Newen’s reading the case of G.L. supports rather than contradicts the comparator model. Next I suggest how the comparator model can differentiate failures of action attribution in patients suffering parietal lobe lesions and delusions of alien control. I also argue that the apparently unexpected phenomenon of “hyperassociation” is predicted by the comparator model. Finally I suggest that as it stands Synofzik, Vosgerau and Newen’s model is not well specified enough to explain deficits in the sense of agency associated with delusions of thought insertion. Thus they have not met their second argumentative burden of showing how their model is more general than the comparator model.
 
Cunningham, G. Watts (1911). Self-consciousness and consciousness of self. Mind 20 (80):530-537.   (Google | More links) 





 
Delius, Harald (1981). Self-Awareness: A Semantical Inquiry. Beck.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1992). The self as a center of narrative gravity. In Frank S. Kessel, P. M. Cole & D. L. Johnson (eds.), [Book Chapter]. Lawrence Erlbaum.   (Cited by 41 | Google | More links)
Abstract: What is a self? I will try to answer this question by developing an analogy with something much simpler, something which is nowhere near as puzzling as a self, but has some properties in common with selves. What I have in mind is the center of gravity of an object. This is a well-behaved concept in Newtonian physics. But a center of gravity is not an atom or a subatomic particle or any other physical item in the world. It has no mass; it has no color; it has no physical properties at all, except for spatio-temporal location. It is a fine example of what Hans Reichenbach would call an abstractum. It is a purely abstract object. It is, if you like , a theorist's fiction. It is not one of the real things in the universe in addition to the atoms. But it is a fiction that has nicely defined, well delineated and well behaved role within physics








 
Dodd, James (2001). On Dan Zahavi's self-awareness and alterity. Graduate Faculty Philosophy Journal 23 (1):191-198.   (Google) 
 
Dyck, Corey W. (2006). Empirical consciousness explained: Self-affection, (self-)consciousness and perception in the B deduction. Kantian Review 11 (1):29-54.   (Google) 
 
Eilan, Naomi M. (1995). Consciousness and the self. In Jose Luis Bermudez, Anthony J. Marcel & Naomi M. Eilan (eds.), The Body and the Self. MIT Press.   (Cited by 10 | Google) 
 
Eilan, Naomi M. & Marcel, Anthony J. (1995). Self-consciousness and the body: An interdisciplinary introduction. In Jose Luis Bermudez, Anthony J. Marcel & Naomi M. Eilan (eds.), The Body and the Self. MIT Press.   (Cited by 12 | Google) 
 
Eilan, Naomi M. (ms). Self-location, consciousness, and attention.   (Google)
Abstract: ‘Like the shadow of one’s own head, [the referent of one’s ‘I’ thoughts] will not wait to be jumped on. And yet it is never very far ahead; indeed, sometimes it does not seem to be ahead of the pursuer at all. It evades capture by lodging itself in the very inside of the muscles of the pursuer. It is too near even to be within arm’s reach.’(C of M 177-89)
 
Ezcurdia, Maite (2001). Thinking about myself. In Andrew Brook & R. DeVidi (eds.), Self-Reference and Self-Awareness. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Falk, Arthur E. (1995). Consciousness and self-reference. Erkenntnis 43 (2):151-80.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 




 
Fasching, Wolfgang (2009). The mineness of experience. Continental Philosophy Review 42 (2):131-148.   (Google)
Abstract: In this paper I discuss the nature of the “I” (or “self”) and whether it is presupposed by the very existence of conscious experiences (as that which “has” them) or whether it is, instead, in some way constituted by them. I argue for the former view and try to show that the very nature of experience implies a non-constituted synchronic and diachronic transcendence of the experiencing “I” with regard to its experiences, an “I” which defies any objective characterization. Finally I suggest that the self, though irreducible to inter-experiential relations, is not a “separately existing entity”, but should be conceived of as a dimension , namely the dimension of first-personal manifestation of the experiences
 
Frank, Manfred (2002). Self-consciousness and self-knowledge: On some difficulties with the reduction of subjectivity. Constellations 9 (3):390-408.   (Google | More links) 







 
Frith, U. & Happe, F. (1999). Theory of mind and self-consciousness: What is it like to be autistic? Mind and Language 14 (1):1-22.   (Cited by 59 | Google | More links) 






 
Gallagher, Shaun (2000). Self-reference and schizophrenia: A cognitive model of immunity to error through misidentification. In Dan Zahavi (ed.), Exploring the Self: Philosophical and Psychopathological Perspectives on Self-Experience. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 35 | Google) 
 
Gallagher, Shaun & Meltzoff, Andrew N. (1996). The earliest sense of self and others: Merleau-ponty and recent developmental studies. Philosophical Psychology 9 (2):211-33.   (Cited by 99 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Recent studies in developmental psychology have found evidence to suggest that there exists an innate system that accounts for the possibilities of early infant imitation and the existence of phantom limbs in cases of congenital absence of limbs. These results challenge traditional assumptions about the status and development of the body schema and body image, and about the nature of the translation process between perceptual experience and motor ability





 
Gallagher, Shaun (1996). The moral significance of primitive self-consciousness: A response to Bermudez. Ethics 107 (1):129-40.   (Cited by 12 | Google | More links) 






 
Gallagher, Shaun (2000). Ways of knowing the self and the other. Theoria Et Historia Scientiarum 7 (1).   (Cited by 2 | Google)
Abstract: Gallagher, S. 2000. Ways of Knowing the Self and the Other. An Introduction to Ipseity and Alterity, a special issue of the online journal _Arobase: Journal des lettres et sciences humaines,_ 4 (1-2). Hardcopy publication: S. Gallagher and S. Watson. (in press). _Ipseity and Alterity: Interdisciplinary Approaches to Intersubjectivity_ . Rouen: Presses Universitaires de
 
Garrett, Brian J. (2003). Bermudez on self-consciousness. Philosophical Quarterly 53 (210):96-101.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 






 
Gennaro, Rocco J. (1996). Consciousness and Self-Consciousness: A Defense of the Higher-Order Thought Theory of Consciousness. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 51 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This interdisciplinary work contains the most sustained attempt at developing and defending one of the few genuine theories of consciousness.







 
Gennaro, Rocco J. (1992). Consciousness, self-consciousness, and episodic memory. Philosophical Psychology 5 (4):333-47.   (Cited by 4 | Annotation | Google)





Abstract: My aim in this paper is to show that consciousness entails self-consciousness by focusing on the relationship between consciousness and memory. More specifically, I addreess the following questions: (1) does consciousness require episodic memory?; and (2) does episodic memory require self-consciousness? With the aid of some Kantian considerations and recent empirical data, it is argued that consciousness does require episodic memory. This is done after defining episodic memory and distinguishing it from other types of memory. An affirmative answer to (2) is also warranted especially in the light of the issues raised in answering (1). I claim that 'consciousness entails self-consciousness' is thereby shown via the route through episodic memory, i.e. via affirmative answers to (1) and (2). My aim is to revive this Kantian thesis and to bring together current psychological research on amnesia with traditional philosophical perspectives on consciousness and memory
 
Gennaro, Rocco J. (1999). Leibniz on consciousness and self-consciousness. In Chalres Huenemann & Rocco J. Gennaro (eds.), New Essays on the Rationalists. Oxford University Press.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In the absence of any plausible reductionist account of consciousness in nonmentalistic terms, the HOT theory says that the best explanation for what makes a mental state conscious is that it is accompanied by a thought (or awareness) that one is in that state.[i] The sense of





 
Gomes, Gilberto (1995). Self-awareness and the mind-brain problem. Philosophical Psychology 8 (2):155-65.   (Cited by 10 | Google)
Abstract: The prima facie heterogeneity between psychical and physical phenomena seems to be a serious objection to psychoneural identity thesis, according to many authors, from Leibniz to Popper. It is argued that this objection can be superseded by a different conception of consciousness. Consciousness, while being conscious of something, is always unconscious of itself . Consciousness of being conscious is not immediate, it involves another, second-order, conscious state. The appearance of mental states to second-order consciousness does not reveal their true nature. Psychoneural identity can thus be considered a valid hypothesis. Related views of Kant, Freud, Shaffer, Bunge and others are considered. “Naive psychical realism” is criticised. Consciousness of mental events is considered as the result of the action of a cerebral system that observes the neural events hypothetically identical to mental events. The theory combines a materialist view with a due consideration of subjective experience
 
Graham, George (online). Self-consciousness, psychopathology, and realism about self.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 




 
Gruenbaum, Thor & Zahavi, Dan (2004). The ambiguity of self-consciousness: A preface. In Thor Gruenbaum, Dan Zahavi & Josef Parnas (eds.), The Structure and Development of Self-Consciousness: Interdisciplinary Perspectives. Amsterdam: J Benjamins.   (Google) 
 
Haldane, John J. (2003). (I am) thinking. Ratio 16 (2):124-139.   (Google | More links) 






 
Harre, Rom (1981). On the problem of self-consciousness. In U.J. Jensen & Harre. R. (eds.), The Philosophy Of Evolution. St Martin's Press.   (Google) 
 
Hart, James G. & Kapitan, Tomis (eds.) (1999). The Phenomeno-Logic of the I: Essays on Self-Consciousness. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Henry Scott, William (1918). Consciousness and self-consciousness. Philosophical Review 27 (1):1-20.   (Google | More links) 




 
Hobson, Allan (2005). Finally some one: Reflections on Thomas Metzinger's Being No One. Psyche 11 (5).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: I praise Metzinger's book _On Being No One_ by calling my essay "Finally Some One" meaning that I am pleased to see a first rate philosopher so carefully reading the neurobiological literature. Especially as it pertains to sleep and dreaming. Metzinger is comprehensive and comprehending. By studying the neurobiological substrates of normal dreaming, lucid dreaming and related altered states of consciousness (such as out of body experiences, hypnosis, and deja' vu), we may gain insight into the general rules governing brain activity in relation to subjective experience





 
Hogan, Melinda & Martin, R. (2001). Introspective misidentification: An I for an I. In Andrew Brook & R. DeVidi (eds.), Self-Reference and Self-Awareness. John Benjamins.   (Google) 
 
Hurley, Susan L. (1998). Nonconceptual self-consciousness and agency: Perspective and access. Communication and Cognition 30 (3-4):207-247.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 






 
Hurley, Susan L. (1998). Self-consciousness, spontaneity, and the myth of the giving. In Consciousness in Action. Cambridge.   (Google)
Abstract: From my Consciousness in Action, ch. 2; see Consciousness in Action for bibligraphy. This chapter revises material from "Kant on Spontaneity and the Myth of the Giving", Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1993-94, pp. 137-164, and "Myth Upon Myth", Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1996, vol. 96, pp. 253-260
 
Carruthers, Glenn (2009). Is the body schema sufficient for the sense of embodiment? An alternative to de Vignmont's model. Philosophical Psychology 22 (2):123-142.   (Google)
Abstract: De Vignemont argues that the sense of ownership comes from the localization of bodily sensation on a map of the body that is part of the body schema. This model should be taken as a model of the sense of embodiment. I argue that the body schema lacks the theoretical resources needed to explain this phenomenology. Furthermore, there is some reason to think that a deficient sense of embodiment is not associated with a deficient body schema. The data de Vignemont uses to argue that the body image does not underlie the sense of embodiment does not rule out the possibility that part of the body image I call 'offline representations' underlies the sense of embodiment. An alternative model of the sense of embodiment in terms of offline representations of the body is presented.
 
James, William (1890). The consciousness of self. In William James (ed.), The Principles of Psychology. Harvard University Press.   (Cited by 9 | Google) 
 
Janzen, Greg (2005). Self-consciousness and phenomenal character. Dialogue 44 (4):707-733.   (Cited by 2 | Google)
Abstract: This article defends two theses: that a mental state is conscious if and only if it has phenomenal character, i.e., if and only if there is something it is like for the subject to be in that state, and that all state consciousness involves selfconsciousness, in the sense that a mental state is conscious if and only if its possessor is, in some suitable way, conscious of being in it. Though neither of these theses is novel, there is a dearth of direct arguments for them in the scholarly literature and the relationship between them has so far gone underrecognized. This article attempts to remedy this lack, advancing the claim that if all conscious states have phenomenal character, then all state consciousness involves self-consciousness.Cet article soutient deux th
 
Kapitan, Tomis (2006). Indexicality and self-awareness. In Uriah Kriegel & Kenneth Williford (eds.), Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Google)
Abstract: Self-awareness is commonly expressed by means of indexical expressions, primarily, first- person pronouns like
 
Kapitan, Tomis (1999). The ubiquity of self-awareness. Grazer Philosophische Studien 57:17-44.   (Cited by 6 | Google)
Abstract: Two claims have been prominent in recent discussions of self-consciousness. One is that first-person reference or first-person thinking is irreducible (the Irreducibility Thesis), and the other is that an awareness of self accompanies all conscious states, at least those through which one refers to something. The latter--here termed the Ubiquity Thesis--has long been associated with philosophers like Fichte, Brentano, and Sartre, though each articulated his own version of the claim. More recently, variants have been defended by Dieter Henrich (1970) and Manfred Frank (1991, 1995a, 1995b). In Frank's words
 
Kitcher, Patricia S. (2005). Two normative roles for self-consciousness. In Herbert S. Terrace & Janet Metcalfe (eds.), The Missing Link in Cognition: Origins of Self-Reflective Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Kriegel, Uriah (2004). Consciousness and self-consciousness. The Monist 87 (2):182-205.   (Cited by 9 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In recent philosophy of mind, it is often assumed that consciousness and self-consciousness are two separate phenomena. In this paper, I argue that this is not quite right. The argument proceeds in two phases. First, I draw a distinction between (i) being self-conscious of a thought that p and (ii) self-consciously thinking that p. I call the former transitive self-consciousness and the latter intransitive self-consciousness. I then argue that consciousness does depend on intransitive self-consciousness, and that the common reasons for denying the dependence of consciousness upon self-consciousness apply only to transitive self-consciousness





 
Kriegel, Uriah (online). Self-consciousness. Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.   (Google) 
 
Kvanvig, Jonathan L. (1989). The haecceity theory and perspectival limitation. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 67 (September):295-305.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 







 
Laycock, Steven W. (2002). Consciousness it/self. In Shaun Gallagher & Jonathan Shear (eds.), Models of the Self. Imprint Academic.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 




 
LeGrand, Dorothy (2005). Transparently oneself: Commentary on Metzinger's Being No-One. Psyche 11 (5).   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Different points of Metzinger's position makes it a peculiar form of representationalism: (1) his distinction between intentional and phenomenal content, in relation to the internalism/externalism divide; (2) the notion of transparency defined at a phenomenal and not epistemic level, together with (3) the felt inwardness of experience. The distinction between reflexive and pre-reflexive phenomenal internality will allow me to reconsider Metzinger's theory of the self and to propose an alternative conception that I will describe both at an epistemic and a phenomenal level






 
Leighton, Joseph A. (1905). Self and not-self in primitive experience. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 2 (14):372-376.   (Google | More links) 





 
Martin, Wayne M. (online). Conscience and consciousness: Rousseau's critique of the stoic theory of Oikeosis.   (Google)
Abstract: I set out to trace the history of a distinctive conception of self-consciousness -- from its first formulation in the 3rd century BC, through its reception among Roman philosophers around the 1st century AD, and finally to its fate in Enlightenment thought of the 18th century. I use this history to clarify and defend an idea that figured centrally in the history of philosophy, but which has recently come under sustained attack: the idea that human beings are in some very fundamental way self- conscious beings, and that our self-consciousness serves as a kind of foundation or transcendental condition for our other cognitive capacities. Obviously, given the scale of these ambitions, the presentation here should be considered at best a sketch. It is intended not to settle any matters, but at least to bring back into view a line of argument that has been covered over by more recent developments
 
McCarthy, John (ms). Notes on self-awareness.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 





 
McGeer, Victoria (2004). Autistic self-awareness. Philosophy, Psychiatry, and Psychology 11 (3):235-251.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
McGeer, Victoria (2004). Autistic self-awareness: Comment. Philosophy, Psychiatry, and Psychology. Special Issue 11 (3):235-251.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Meijsing, Monica (2006). Being ourselves and knowing ourselves: An adverbial account of mental representations. Consciousness and Cognition 15 (3):605-619.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper takes an evolutionary approach to what we are, namely autopoietic systems with a first person perspective on our surroundings and ourselves. This in contrast with Thomas Metzinger








 
Meijsing, Monica (2000). Self-consciousness and the body. Journal Of Consciousness Studies 7 (6):34-50.   (Cited by 10 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Traditionally, what we are conscious of in self-consciousness is something non-corporeal. But anti-Cartesian philosophers argue that the self is as much corporeal as it is mental. Because we have the sense of proprioception, a kind of body awareness, we are immediately aware of ourselves as bodies in physical space. In this debate the case histories of patients who have lost their sense of proprioception are clearly relevant. These patients do retain an awareness of themselves as corporeal beings, although they hardly feel their bodies (they have normal sensation in the head, but from the neck downwards only sensations of pain and temperature, and of fatigue and deep touch). They can initiate movements, and with the help of visual feedback learn to control them. It is shown that the traditional view of the self as immaterial is not supported by these cases. But the argument against this view has to be amended. It relies too much on bodily sensations, and misses the importance of active self-movement





 
Menant, Christophe (ms). Evolution and mirror neurons. An introduction to the nature of self-consciousness (2005).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Self-consciousness is a product of evolution. Few people today disagree with the evolutionary history of humans. But the nature of self-consciousness is still to be explained, and the story of evolution has rarely been used as a framework for studies on consciousness during the 20th century. This last point may be due to the fact that modern study of consciousness came up at a time where dominant philosophical movements were not in favor of evolutionist theories (Cunningham 1996). Research on consciousness based on Phenomenology or on Analytic Philosophy has been mostly taking the characteristics of humans as starting points. Relatively little has been done with bottom-up approaches, using performances of animals as a simpler starting point to understand the generation of consciousness through evolution. But this status may be changing, thanks to new tools coming from recent discoveries in neurology. The discovery of mirror neurons about ten years ago (Gallese et al. 1996, Rizzolatti et al. 1996) has allowed the built up of new conceptual tools for the understanding of intersubjectivity within humans and non human primates (Gallese 2001, Hurley 2005). Studies in these fields are still in progress, with discussions on the level of applicability of this natural intersubjectivity to non human primates (Decety and Chaminade 2003). We think that these subject/conspecific mental relations made possible by mirror neurons can open new paths for the understanding of the nature of self-consciousness via an evolutionist bottom-up approach. We propose here a scenario for the build up of self-consciousness through evolution by a specific analysis of two steps of evolution: first step from simple living elements to non human primates comparable to chimpanzees, and second step from these non human primates to humans. We identify these two steps as representing the evolution from basic animal awareness to body self-awareness, and from body self-awareness to self-consciousness. (we consider that today non human primates are comparable to what were pre-human primates). We position body self-awareness as corresponding to the performance of mirror self recognition as identified with chimpanzees and orangutans (Gallup). We propose to detail and understand the content of this body self-awareness through a specific evolutionist build up process using the performances of mirror neurons and group life. We address the evolutionary step from body self-awareness to self-consciousness by complementing the recently proposed approach where self-consciousness is presented as a by-product of body self-awareness amplification via a positive feedback loop resulting of anxiety limitation (Menant 2004). The scenario introduced here for the build up of self-consciousness through evolution leaves open the question about the nature of phenomenal-consciousness (Block 2002). We plan to address this question later on with the help of the scenario made available here





 
Menant, Christophe, Evolution of representations and intersubjectivity as sources of the self. An introduction to the nature of self-consciousness (2006).   (Google)
Abstract: It is agreed by most people that self-consciousness is the result of an evolutionary process, and that representations may have played an important role in that process. We would like to propose here that some evolutionary stages can highlight links existing between representations and the notion of self, opening a possible path to the nature of self-consciousness. Our starting point is to focus on representations as usage oriented items for the subject that carries them. These representations are about elements of the environment including conspecifics, and can also represent parts of the subject without refering to a notion of self (we introduce the notion of "auto-representation" that does not carry the notion of self-representation). Next step uses the performance of intersubjectivity (mirror neurons level in evolution) where a subject has the capability to mentally simulate the observed action of a conspecific (Gallese 2001). We propose that this intersubjectivity allows the subject to identify his auto-representation with the representations of his conspecifics, and so to consider his auto-representation as existing in the environment. We show how this evolutionary stage can introduce a notion of self-representation for a subject, opening a road to self-conciousness and to self. This evolutionary approach to the self via self- representation is close to the current theory of the self linked to representations and simulations (Metzinger 2003). We use a scenario about how evolution has brought the performance of self-representation to self-consciousness. We develop a process describing how the anxiety increase resulting from identification with endangered or suffering conspecifics may have called for the development of tools to limit this anxiety (empathy, imitation, language), and how these tools have accelerated the evolutionary process through a positive feedback on intersubjectivity (Menant 2004, 2005). We finish by summarizing the points addressed, and propose some possible continuations
 
Menant, Christophe (ms). Evolution of representations. From basic life to self-representation and self-consciousness (2006).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The notion of representation is at the foundation of cognitive sciences and is used in theories of mind and consciousness. Other notions like ‘embodiment’, 'intentionality‘, 'guidance theory' or ‘biosemantics’ have been associated to the notion of representation to introduce its functional aspect. We would like to propose here that a conception of 'usage related' representation eases its positioning in an evolutionary context, and opens new areas of investigation toward self-representation and self-consciousness. The subject is presented in five parts:Following an overall presentation, the first part introduces a usage related representation as being an information managed by a system submitted to a constraint that has to be satisfied. We consider that such a system can generate a meaningful information by comparing its constraint to a received information (Menant 2003). We define a representation as being made of the received information and of the meaningful information. Such approach allows groundings in and out for the representation relatively to the system. The second part introduces the two types of representations we want to focus on for living organisms: representations of conspecifics and auto-representation, the latter being defined without using a notion of self-representation. Both types of representations have existed for our pre-human ancestors which can be compared to today great apes.In the third part, we use the performance of intersubjectivity as identified in group life with the presence of mirror neurons in the organisms. Mirror neurons have been discovered in the 90‘s (Rizzolatti & al.1996, Gallese & al.1996). The level of intersubjectivity that can be attributed to non human primates as related to mirror neurons is currently a subject of debate (Decety 2003). We consider that a limited intersubjectivity between pre-human primates made possible a merger of both types of representations. The fourth part proposes that such a merger of representations feeds the auto-representation with the meanings associated to the representations of conspecifics, namely the meanings associated to an entity perceived as existing in the environment. We propose that auto-representation carrying these new meanings makes up the first elements of self-representation. Intersubjectivity has allowed auto-representation to evolve into self-representation, avoiding the homunculus risk. The fifth part is a continuation to other presentations (Menant 2004, 2005) about possible evolution of self-representation into self-consciousness. We propose that identification with suffering or endangered conspecifics has increased anxiety, and that the tools used to limit this anxiety (development of empathy, imitation, language and group life) have provided a positive feedback on intersubjectivity and created an evolutionary engine for the organism. Other outcomes have also been possible. Such approach roots consciousness in emotions. The evolutionary scenario proposed here does not introduce explicitly the question of phenomenal consciousness (Block 1995). This question is to be addressed later with the help of this scenario.The conclusion lists the points introduced here with their possible continuations





 
Menon, Sangeetha (2007). The Beyond Experience: Consciousness in the Bhagavad Gita. Blu Jay Books.   (Google) 
 
Metzinger, Thomas (2003). Being No One: The Self-Model Theory of Subjectivity. MIT Press.   (Cited by 143 | Google | More links)
Abstract: " In Being No One, Metzinger, a German philosopher, draws strongly on neuroscientific research to present a representationalist and functional analysis of...






 
Metzinger, Thomas (2003). Phenomenal transparency and cognitive self-reference. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 2 (4):353-393.   (Cited by 17 | Google | More links) 








 
Metzinger, Thomas (2005). Precis: Being No-One. Psyche 11 (5).   (Google)
Abstract: This is a short sketch of some central ideas developed in my recent book _Being No One_ (BNO hereafter). A more systematic summary, which focuses on short answers to a set of specific, individual questions is already contained _in _the book, namely as BNO section 8.2. Here, I deliberately and completely exclude all work related to semantically differentiating and empirically constraining the philosophical concept of a "quale" (mostly Chapter 2, 3 & 8), all proposals regarding conceptual foundations for the overall theory (2 & 5), all of the neurophenomenological case-studies used to test and refine it (4 & 7), and all remarks of a more general or methodological character (1 & 8). In particular, the present Pr
 
Metzinger, Thomas (2006). Reply to ghin: Self-sustainment on the level of global availability. Psyche 12 (4).   (Google)
Abstract: Of all the current philosophical attempts to rescue the concept of “self” by working out a weaker version, one that does not imply an ontological substance or an individual in the metaphysical sense, Marcello Ghin’s is clearly my favorite. His reconstruction of the original theory is absolutely accurate and without any major misunderstandings. Enriching the concept of a “SMT-system” with the notions of “autocatalysis” and “self- sustainment,” and adding the intriguing idea that we are systems reflecting these processes on a new level of complexity, namely with the help of an integrated PSM on the level of conscious experience, seems the way to go if one wants to keep the concept of “self.” I have great difficulties in writing a reply to Ghin’s commentary, simply because I agree with so much in it. Let us see where his approach leads us
 
Metzinger, Thomas (online). Self models.   (Google) 
 
Metzinger, Thomas (2000). The subjectivity of subjective experience: A representationist analysis of the first-person perspective. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Neural Correlates of Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Cited by 40 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This is a brief and accessible English summary of the "Self-model Theory of Subjectivity" (SMT), which is only available as German book in this archive. It introduces two new theoretical entities, the "phenomenal self-model" (PSM) and the "phenomenal model of the intentionality-relation" PMIR. A representationalist analysis of the phenomenal first-person persepctive is offered. This is a revised version, including two pictures














 
Minissale, Gregory (2009). Enacting Higher Order Thoughts: Velazquez and Las Meninas. Journal of Consciousness Studies 16 (2-3):165-89.   (Google)
Abstract: This paper bridges art history and consciousness studies and investigates the network of gazes and frames in Las Meninas and how this engages with a system of higher-order thoughts and reflexive operations.
 
Mittal, Kewal K. (1979). Self-identity and self-consciousness. Indian Philosophical Quarterly 7 (October):159-63.   (Google) 
 
Moran, Richard A. (1999). The authority of self-consciousness. Philosophical Topics 26:174-200.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Mulhauser, Gregory R. (online). What is self-awareness?   (Google) 
 
Nair, Jyotsna (2004). Knowing Me, Knowing You: Self-Awareness in Asperger's and Autism. In Bernard D. Beitman & Jyotsna Nair (eds.), Self-Awareness Deficits in Psychiatric Patients: Neurobiology, Assessment, and Treatment. WW Norton & Co.   (Google) 
 
Nasr, Seyyed Hossein (1988). Self-awareness and ultimate selfhood. In George F. McLean & Hugo Anthony Meynell (eds.), Person And Society. Lanham: University Press Of America.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Nasr, Seyyed Hossein (1977). Self-awareness and ultimate selfhood. Religious Studies 13 (September):319-325.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1983). The experience of a conscious self. Journal of Mind and Behavior 4:451-478.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (2003). What is this autonoetic consciousness? Journal of Mind and Behavior 24 (2):229-254.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Nichols, Shaun & Stich, Stephen P. (2003). Reading one's own mind: A cognitive theory of self-awareness. In Quentin Smith & Aleksandar Jokic (eds.), Consciousness: New Philosophical Perspectives. Oup.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 




 
Noe, Alva (2002). Is perspectival self-consciousness nonconceptual? Philosophical Quarterly 52 (207):185-194.   (Google | More links) 








 
O'Brien, Lucy F. (1996). Solipsism and self-reference. European Journal Of Philosophy 4 (2):175-194.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper I want to propose that we see solipsism as arising from certain problems we have about identifying ourselves as subjects in an objective world. The discussion will centre on Wittgenstein





 
O'Brien, Lucy F. (1995). The problem of self-identification. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 95:235-251.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
O'Hear, Anthony (1989). Evolution, knowledge, and self-consciousness. Inquiry 32 (June):127-150.   (Google) 
 
O'Shaughnessy, Brian (1972). Mental structure and self-consciousness. Inquiry 15 (1-4):30-63.   (Google)
Abstract: Mental health, in one awake, guarantees that person knowledge of the central phenomenon-contents of his own mind, under an adequate classificatory heading. This is the primary thesis of the paper. That knowledge is not itself a phenomenon-content, and usually is achieved in no way. Rather, it stems from the natural accessibility of mental phenomenon-contents to wakeful consciousness. More precisely, when mental normality obtains, such knowledge necessarily obtains in wakeful consciousness. This thesis conjoins a version of Cartesianism with the concepts of mental health and human nature. Demonstration of the thesis requires that we show that a particular human mental potential fails fully to be realized when such self-awareness is impaired. That potential is for consciousness of the world (w-Cs), wakefulness. W-Cs divides into consciousness of the outer world (ow-Cs), and consciousness of the inner world (iw-Cs), and we need to demonstrate an essential dependence of ow-Cs upon iw-Cs. Now w-Cs is the adoption of the correct occurrent epistemological posture to the world, and this involves free rational determination of occurrent cognitive attitudes via the internal systematized knowledge of the world, which requires adequate awareness of mental phenomenon-contents. Therefore ow-Cs needs iw-Cs. This is displayed in mental structural accounts of hypnotic, drunken, and psychotic disturbances of consciousness. (For we endorse a structural account of mental health.) We show how failures of self-consciousness entail disturbed modes of determination of cognitive attitudes by the knowledge-system, which is loss of contact with the personal yet true internal representation of the world, which is loss of contact with reality, which is a disturbance both of w-Cs and of consciousness itself
 
Parker, S. T.; Mitchell, R. M. & Boccia, M. L. (1994). Self-Awareness in Animals and Humans: Developmental Perspectives. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 100 | Google) 
 
Peacocke, Christopher (2005). 'Another I': Representing Conscious States, Perception, and Others. In Jose Luis Bermudez & José Luis Bermúdez (eds.), Thought, Reference, and Experience: Themes From the Philosophy of Gareth Evans. Oxford: Clarendon Press.   (Google)
Abstract: What is it for a thinker to possess the concept of perceptual experience? What is it to be able to think of seeings, hearings and touchings, and to be able to think of experiences that are subjectively like seeings, hearings and touchings?
 
Pendlebury, Michael J. (2002). Opacity and self-consciousness. Southern Journal of Philosophy 40 (2):243-251.   (Google) 
 
Persson, Ingmar (1999). Awareness of one's body as subject and object. Philosophical Explorations 2 (1):70-76.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper rejects Hume's famous claim that we never perceive our selves, by arguing that, under conditions specified, our perception of our bodies is perception of our selves. It takes as its point of departure Quassim Cassam's defence of a position to a similar effect but puts a different interpretation on the distinction between perceiving the body as an object, having spatial attributes, and perceiving it as a self or subject of experiences





 
Perry, John (1998). Myself and "I". In Marcelo Stamm (ed.), Philosophie in Synthetischer Absicht.   (Cited by 16 | Google | More links) 




 
Power, Nicholas P. (2001). The origins of self-consciousness. Minds and Machines 11 (1):133-137.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Prado, C. G. (1978). Reflexive awareness. New Scholasticism 52:428-433.   (Google) 
 
Proust, Jo (2000). Awareness of agency: Three levels of analysis. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Neural Correlates of Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Cited by 14 | Google | More links) 






 
Proust, Jo (2003). Thinking of oneself as the same. Consciousness and Cognition 12 (4):495-509.   (Cited by 12 | Google | More links) 









 
Ramachandra, G. P. (1997). Is there such a thing as self-consciousness? Journal of Indian Council of Philosophical Research 15 (1):83-85.   (Google) 
 
Richards, William M. (1984). Self-consciousness and agency. Synthese 61 (November):149-71.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Rinofner-Kreidl, Sonja (2004). Representationalism and beyond: A phenomenological critique of Thomas Metzinger's self-model theory. Journal of Consciousness Studies 11 (10-11):88-108.   (Google) 
 
Rinofner-Kreidl, Sonja (2005). The limits of representationalism: A phenomenological critique of Thomas Metzinger's self-model theory. Synthesis Philosophica 2 (40):355-371.   (Google | More links) 





 
Robbins, P. (2003). The paradox of self-consciousness revisited. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 84 (4):424-443.   (Google | More links) 






 
Roessler, Johannes (ed.) (2003). Agency and Self-Awareness: Issues in Philosophy and Psychology. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In recent years there has been much psychological and neurological work purporting to show that consciousness and self-awareness play no role in causing actions, and indeed to demonstrate that free will is an illusion. The essays in this volume subject the assumptions that motivate such claims to sustained interdisciplinary scrutiny. The book will be compulsory reading for psychologists and philosophers working on action explanation, and for anyone interested in the relation between the brain sciences and consciousness






 
Roessler, Johannes (2002). Action, emotion, and the development of self-awareness. European Review of Philosophy 5:33-52.   (Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (2004). Being conscious of ourselves. The Monist 87 (2):161-184.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Rosenberg, Jay F. (1986). The Thinking Self. Philadephia: Temple University Press.   (Cited by 13 | Google) 
 
Royce, Josiah (1895). Self-consciousness, social consciousness, and nature. II. Philosophical Review 4 (6):577-602.   (Google | More links) 







 
Carruthers, Glenn (2008). Reply to Tsakiris and Fotopoulou "Is my body the sum of online and offline body representations. Consciousness and Cognition 17 (1321):1323.   (Google)
Abstract: I thank Tsakiris and Fotopoulou for their insightful commentary on my target article. In particular I welcome the opportunity to revisit how the online/offline representation of the body distinction is drawn. Tsakiris and Fotopoulou raise three major points of concern with my model. First they argue that the sense of embodiment is not sufficient for self recognition. Second they show that the relationship between online and offline representations of the body cannot be the simple ‘serial construction’ relationship I advocate in the target article. Third they claim that my model makes a false prediction. I agree with the first two lines of criticism. As to the first I will clarify and tone down the claims made about the role of the sense of embodiment in self recognition tasks. However, I will argue that the sense of embodiment is measured in van den Bos and Jeannerod’s study. I strongly welcome the second line of criticism Tsakiris and Fotopoulou offer. I will add some reasons to agree that the ‘serial construction’ account of the relationship between online and offline representations cannot be true. I maintain, however, that this does not affect the central thesis of target article, namely that it is an offline representation of the body that underlies the sense of embodiment. Finally, I will defend the model by arguing that it does not make the false prediction Tsakiris and Fotopoulou attribute to it.
 
Baker, Lynne Rudder (2003). The difference that self-consciousness makes. In Klaus Petrus (ed.), On Human Persons: Metaphysical Research, Volume 1. Heusenstamm Nr Frankfurt: Ontos Verlag.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Rutgers Marshall, Henry (1901). Consciousness, self-consciousness and the self. Mind 10 (37):98-113.   (Google | More links) 




 
Sacks, Oliver; Cole, Jonathan & Waterman, Ian (2000). On the immunity principle: A view from a robot. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 4 (5).   (Google)
Abstract: Preprint of Cole, Sacks, and Waterman. 2000. "On the immunity principle: A view from a robot." Trends in Cognitive Science 4 (5): 167, a response to Shaun Gallagher, S. 2000. "Philosophical conceptions of the self: implications for cognitive science," Trends in Cognitive Science 4 (1):14-21. Also see Shaun Gallagher, Reply to Cole, Sacks, and Waterman Trends in Cognitive Science 4, No. 5 (2000): 167-68
 
Samsonovich, Alexei V. & Ascoli, Giorgio A. (2005). The conscious self: Ontology, epistemology and the mirror Quest. Cortex. Special Issue 41 (5):621-636.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links) 




 
Scott, Charles E. (1971). Self-consciousness without an ego. Man and World 4 (May):193-201.   (Google) 
 
Shear, Jonathan & Gallagher, Shaun (eds.) (1999). Models of the Self. Imprint Academic.   (Google) 
 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1986). Introspection and the self. Midwest Studies in Philosophy.   (Cited by 35 | Google) 
 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1968). Self-reference and self-awareness. Journal of Philosophy 65 (October):555-67.   (Cited by 84 | Google | More links) 





 
Smith, Joel (2004). On knowing which thing I am. Philosophy 79 (310):591-608.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Russell's Principle states that in order to think about an object I must know which thing it is, in the sense of being able to distinguish it from all other things. I show that, contra Strawson, Evans and Cassam, Russell's Principle cannot be applied to first-person thought so as to yield necessary conditions of self-consciousness. Footnotes1 Thanks to Naomi Eilan, Keith Hossack, Lucy O'Brien and Ann Whittle for helpful comments







 
Smith, David Woodruff (1986). The structure of (self-)consciousness. Topoi 5 (September):149-156.   (Cited by 30 | Google | More links) 




 
Sosa, Ernest (1983). Consciousness of self and of the present. In James E. Tomberlin (ed.), Agent, Language, and the Structure of the World. Hackett.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Stephens, G. Lynn & Graham, George (1994). Self-consciousness, mental agency, and the clinical psychopathology of thought-insertion. Philosophy, Psychiatry, and Psychology 1 (1):1-10.   (Cited by 22 | Google) 
 
Stephens, G. Lynn & Graham, George (2000). When Self-Consciousness Breaks: Alien Voices and Inserted Thoughts. MIT Press.   (Cited by 42 | Google) 
 
Strawson, Galen (1999). Self and body: Self, body, and experience. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 73 (73):307-332.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Strawson, Galen (1999). Self, body, and experience. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 73:307-32.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Strawson, Peter F. (1974). Self, mind, and body. In P.F. Strawson (ed.), Freedom and Resentment and Other Essays. Methuen & Co. Ltd.   (Cited by 9 | Google) 
 
Strawson, Galen (2000). The phenomenology and ontology of the self. In Dan Zahavi (ed.), Exploring the Self. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Strawson, Galen (1997). The self. Journal of Consciousness Studies 4:405-28.   (Google) 
 
Stuart, H. W. (1937). Knowledge and self-consciousness. Philosophical Review 46 (6):609-643.   (Google | More links) 





 
Thornton, Tim (2003). Psychopathology and two kinds of narrative accounts of the self. Philosophy, Psychiatry, and Psychology 10 (4):361-368.   (Google | More links) 





 
Thomas, Alan (online). Reconciling conscious absorption and the ubiquity of self-awareness.   (Google)
Abstract: This paper argues that there are two compelling intuitions about conscious experience, the absorption intuition and the ubiquity intuition. The former is the claim that conscious experience consists in intentional absorption in its objects; the latter is the claim that conscious experience ubiquitously exhibits a sense that the mental subject is conscious that she is so conscious. These two intuitions are in tension with each other and it seems no single theory of consciousness can respect both. Drawing on the early work of Sartre, particularly in The Transcendence of the Ego, I argue that an adverbial theory of consciousness comes closest to doing so: it explains the first intuition and respects the phenomenon that the second intuition is supposed to capture. It emerges, therefore, as the theory of consciousness that is the most explanatory overall. The argument of this paper proceeds as follows. The first section describes the distinctive features of an adverbial approach to consciousness. The second describes the first intuition that conscious experience is typically absorbed in the objects of conscious thought whereas the third describes the intuition that our conscious experience is ubiquitously self- aware. I then turn to an examination to a range of views, influenced by Brentano, that try to reconcile these intuitions and argue that none of them succeed. I conclude with a description of how an adverbialism influenced by Sartre
 
Thomasson, Amie L. (2006). Self-awareness and self-knowledge. Psyche 12 (2).   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: Higher-order theories and neo-Brentanian theories of consciousness both consider conscious states to be states of which we have some sort of
 
Carruthers, Glenn (2008). Types of body representation and the sense of embodiment. Consciousness and Cognition 17 (1302):1316.   (Google)
Abstract: The sense of embodiment is vital for self recognition. An examination of anosognosia for hemiplegia—the inability to recognise that one is paralysed down one side of one’s body—suggests the existence of ‘online’ and ‘offline’ representations of the body. Online representations of the body are representations of the body as it is currently, are newly constructed moment by moment and are directly “plugged into” current perception of the body. In contrast, offline representations of the body are representations of what the body is usually like, are relatively stable and are constructed from online representations. This distinction is supported by an analysis of phantom limb—the feeling that an amputated limb is still present—phenomena. Initially it seems that the sense of embodiment may arise from either of these types of representation; however, an integrated representation of the body seems to be required. It is suggested information from vision and emotions is involved in generating these representations. A lack of access to online representations of the body does not necessarily lead to a loss in the sense of embodiment. An integrated offline representation of the body could account for the sense of embodiment and perform the functions attributed to this sense.
 
Toichi, Motomi; Kamio, Yoko; Okada, Takashi; Sakihama, Morimitsu; Youngstrom, Eric A.; Findling, Robert L. & Yamamoto, Kokichi (2002). A lack of self-consciousness in autism. American Journal of Psychiatry 159 (8):1422-1424.   (Cited by 15 | Google | More links) 






 
Tye, Michael (2003). Consciousness and Persons: Unity and Identity. MIT Press.   (Cited by 20 | Google | More links) 




 
van Gulick, Robert (1988). A functionalist plea for self-consciousness. Philosophical Review 97 (April):149-88.   (Cited by 31 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Varela, Francisco G. (1971). Self-consciousness: Adaptation or epiphenomenon? Stud Gen 24:426-39.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 




 
Walker, Kendrick W. (1976). Armstrong's analysis of self-awareness. Personalist 57:395-402.   (Google) 
 
Weisberg, Josh (2003). Being all that we can be: Review of Metzinger's Being No-One. Journal of Consciousness Studies 10 (11).   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 




 
Weisberg, Josh (2006). Consciousness constrained: A commentary on being no one. Psyche 12 (1):***.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: ABSTRCT: In this commentary, I criticize Metzinger's interdisciplinary approach to fixing the explanandum of a theory of consciousness and I offer a commonsense alternative in its place. I then re-evaluate Metzinger's multi-faceted working concept of consciousness, and argue for a shift away from the notion of "global availability" and towards the notio ns of "perspectivalness" and "transparency." This serves to highlight the role of Metzinger's "phenomenal model of the intentionality relation" (PMIR) in explaining consciousness, and it helps to locate Metzinger's theory in relation to other naturalistic theories of





 
Weisberg, Josh (2005). Consciousness constrained: Commentary on Metzinger. Psyche 11 (5).   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: ABSTRCT: In this commentary, I criticize Metzinger's interdisciplinary approach to fixing the explanandum of a theory of consciousness and I offer a commonsense alternative in its place. I then re-evaluate Metzinger's multi-faceted working concept of consciousness, and argue for a shift away from the notion of "global availability" and towards the notio ns of "perspectivalness" and "transparency." This serves to highlight the role of Metzinger's "phenomenal model of the intentionality relation" (PMIR) in explaining consciousness, and it helps to locate Metzinger's theory in relation to other naturalistic theories of





 
White, Stephen L. (1987). What is it like to be a homunculus? Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 68 (June):148-74.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google)




  
Wider, Kathleen (2006). Emotion and self-consciousness. In Uriah Kriegel & Kenneth Williford (eds.), Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
Winfield, Richard D. (2006). Self-consciousness and intersubjectivity. Review of Metaphysics 59 (4):757-779.   (Google) 
 
Zahavi, Dan & Parnas, Josef (2002). Phenomenal consciousness and self-awareness: A phenomenological critique of representational theory. In Shaun Gallagher & Jonathan Shear (eds.), Models of the Self. Thorverton UK: Imprint Academic.   (Cited by 35 | Google) 
 
Zahavi, Dan (2000). Self and consciousness. In Dan Zahavi (ed.), Exploring the Self: Philosophical and Psychopathological Perspectives on Self-Experience. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links) 




 
Zahavi, Dan (2005). Subjectivity and Selfhood: Investigating the First-Person Perspective. Cambridge MA: Bradford Book/MIT Press.   (Cited by 26 | Google) 
 
Zweig, M. B. (1968). On self-consciousness and a taxonomy of action. The Monist 52 (July):439-451.   (Google) 
 
1.6b The Unity of Consciousness




Alter, Torin (ms). What do split-brain cases show about the unity of consciousness?   (Google)
Abstract: The startling empirical data that concern us here are well known. Severing the corpus callosum produces a kind of mental bifurcation (Sperry 1968). In one experiment, a garlic smell is presented to a patient
 
Arnold, Felix (1905). The unity of mental life. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 2 (18):487-493.   (Google | More links) 





 
Bach, Kent (1988). Critical notice. In Brian P. McLaughlin & Amelie Oksenberg Rorty (eds.), Perspectives on Self-Deception. University of California Press.   (Google)
Abstract: As philosophical topics go, self-deception has something for everyone. It raises basic questions about the nature of belief and the relation of belief to thought, desire, and the will. It provokes further questions on such topics as reasoning, attention, self-knowledge, the unity of the self, intentional action, motivation, self-esteem, psychic defenses, the unconscious, personal character, and interpersonal relations. There are two basic questions about self-deception itself, which each take a familiar philosophical form: What is it? How is it possible? These questions have both an analytic and a psychological side. Is self-deception, as its name suggests, literally a case of lying to oneself? If not, how different can it be from other-deception and still deserve its name? Psychologically, what processes does self-deception involve and how is it motivated?
 
Baldner, Kent (1996). Subjectivity and the unity of the world. Philosophical Quarterly 46 (184):333-346.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 





 
Baumann, Peter (2007). Experiencing things together: What is the problem? Erkenntnis 66 (1-2).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Suppose someone hears a loud noise and at the same time sees a yellow flash. It seems hard to deny that the person can experience loudness and yellowness together. However, since loudness is experienced by the auditory sense whereas yellowness is experienced by the visual sense it also seems hard to explain how





 
Bayne, Timothy J. (2001). Co-consciousness: Review of Barry Dainton's Stream of Consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 8:79-92.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 




 
Bayne, Timothy J. (2005). Divided brains and unified phenomenology: A review essay on Michael Tye's Consciousness and Persons. Philosophical Psychology 18 (4):495-512.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In Consciousness and persons, Michael Tye (Tye, M. (2003). Consciousness and persons. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.) develops and defends a novel approach to the unity of consciousness. Rather than thinking of the unity of consciousness as involving phenomenal relations between distinct experiences, as standard accounts do, Tye argues that we should regard the unity of consciousness as involving relations between the contents of consciousness. Having developed an account of what it is for consciousness to be unified, Tye goes on to apply his account of the unity of consciousness to the split-brain syndrome. I provide a critical evaluation of Tye's account of the unity of consciousness and the split-brain syndrome








 
Bayne, Tim (2007). Hypnosis and the unity of consciousness. In Graham A. Jamieson (ed.), Hypnosis and Conscious States: The Cognitive Neuroscience Perspective. Oxford University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: Hypnosis appears to generate unusual—and sometimes even astonishing—changes in the contents of consciousness. Hypnotic subjects report perceiving things that are not there, they report not perceiving things that are there, and they report unusual alterations in the phenomenology of agency. In addition to apparent alterations in the contents of consciousness, hypnosis also appears to involve alterations in the structure of consciousness. According to many theorists—most notably Hilgard—hypnosis demonstrates that the unity of consciousness is an illusion (Hilgard 1977)
 
Bayne, Timothy J. (2004). Self-consciousness and the unity of consciousness. The Monist 87 (2):219-236.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Consciousness has a number of puzzling features. One such feature is its unity: the experiences and other conscious states that one has at a particular time seem to occur together in a certain way. I am currently enjoying visual experiences of my computer screen, auditory experiences of bird-song, olfactory experiences of coffee, and tactile experiences of feeling the ground beneath my feet. Conjoined with these perceptual experiences are proprioceptive experiences, experiences of agency, affective and emotional experiences, and conscious thoughts of various kinds. These experiences are unified in a variety of ways, but the kind of unity that I’m interested in here concerns their phenomenal character. Take just two of these experiences: the sound of bird-song and the smell of coffee. There is something it is like to have the auditory experience, there is something it is like to have the olfactory experience, and there is something it is like to have both the auditory and olfactory experiences together. These two experiences occur as parts or components or aspects of a larger, more complex experience. And what holds of these two experiences seems to hold – at least in normal contexts – of all of one’s simultaneous experiences: they seem to be subsumed by a single, maximal experience.2 We could think of this maximal experience as an experiential perspective on the world. What it is like to be me right now is (or involves) an extremely complex conscious state that subsumes the various simpler experiences that I outlined above (seeing my computer screen, hearing bird-song, smelling coffee, and so on). I will follow recent literature in using the term “co-consciousness” for the relation that a set of conscious states bear to each other when they have a complex phenomenology (Bayne and Chalmers 2003; Dainton 2000; Hurley 1998; Lockwood 1989)





 
Bayne, Timothy J. (2000). The unity of consciousness: Clarification and defence. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 78 (2):248-254.   (Cited by 34 | Google | More links) 







 
Bayne, Tim (2008). The unity of consciousness and the split-brain syndrome. Journal of Philosophy 105 (6).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: According to conventional wisdom, the split-brain syndrome puts paid to the thesis that consciousness is necessarily unified. The aim of this paper is to challenge that view. I argue both that disunity models of the split-brain are highly problematic, and that there is much to recommend a model of the split-brain—the switch model—according to which split-brain patients retain a fully unified consciousness at all times. Although the task of examining the unity of consciousness through the lens of the split-brain syndrome is not a new one—such projects date back to Nagel’s seminal paper on the topic—the time is ripe for a re-evaluation of the issues







 
Bayne, Tim, The unity of consciousness: A cartography.   (Google)
Abstract: theorists insist that consciousness is essentially unified. Other theorists assert that the unity of consciousness is an illusion, and that consciousness is often, if not invariably, disunified. Unfortunately, it is rare for proponents of either side of the debate to explain what the unity of consciousness might involve. What would it mean for consciousness to be unified? In this chapter I provide a brief cartography of the unity of consciousness. In the next section I introduce a number of unity relations that can hold between conscious states, and in the following sections I show how these unity relations can be used to construct various conceptions of the unity of consciousness—what I call unity theses. These unity theses provide us with a set of reference points by means of which we can orient discussions of the (dis)unity of consciousness
 
Bayne, Timothy J. (forthcoming). Unified phenomenology and divided brains: Critical notice of Michael Tye's Consciousness and Persons. Philosophical Psychology.   (Google) 
 
Bayne, Timothy J. & Chalmers, David J. (2003). What is the unity of consciousness? In Axel Cleeremans (ed.), The Unity of Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: At any given time, a subject has a multiplicity of conscious experiences. A subject might simultaneously have visual experiences of a red book and a green tree, auditory experiences of birds singing, bodily sensations of a faint hunger and a sharp pain in the shoulder, the emotional experience of a certain melancholy, while having a stream of conscious thoughts about the nature of reality. These experiences are distinct from each other: a subject could experience the red book without the singing birds, and could experience the singing birds without the red book. But at the same time, the experiences seem to be tied together in a deep way. They seem to be unified, by being aspects of a single encompassing state of consciousness






 
Beahrs, J. O. (1983). Co-consciousness: A common denominator in hypnosis, multiple personality, and normalcy. American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis 26:100-13.   (Cited by 10 | Google) 
 
Beahrs, J. O. (1982). Unity and Multiplicity: Multilevel Consciousness of Self in Hypnosis, Psychiatric Disorder, and Mental Health. Brunner/Mazel.   (Cited by 37 | Google) 
 
Brook, Andrew & Raymont, Paul (forthcoming). A Unified Theory of Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
Brotherston, Bruce W. (1933). Immediate empiricism and unity. Journal of Philosophy 30 (6):141-149.   (Google | More links) 





 
Brooks, Eugene M. (2005). Multiplicity of consciousness. Imagination, Cognition and Personality 24 (3):271-280.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Brooks, D. H. M. (1985). Strawson, Hume, and the unity of consciousness. Mind 94 (October):583-86.   (Google | More links) 





 
Brook, Andrew (2000). The unity of consciousness. Consciousness And Cognition 9 (2).   (Cited by 12 | Google | More links) 






 
Brooks, D. H. M. (1995). The Unity of the Mind. St Martin's Press.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Brook, Andrew (2002). Unified consciousness and the self. In Shaun Gallagher & Jonathan Shear (eds.), Models of the Self. Thorverton UK: Imprint Academic.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Brook, Andrew (1998). Unified consciousness and the self. Journal of Consciousness Studies 5 (5-6):583-591.   (Cited by 6 | Google)
Abstract: I am in virtually complete sympathy with Galen Strawson's conclusions in 'The Self'. He takes a careful, measured approach to a topic that lends itself all too easily to speculation and intellectual extravaganzas. The results he achieves are for the most part balanced and plausible. I even have a lot of sympathy with his claim that a memory-produced sense of continuity across time is less central to selfhood than many philosophers think, though I will argue that he goes too far in the opposite direction
 
Brook, Andrew (1997). Unity of consciousness and other mental unities. In Proceedings of the 19th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Ablex Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: Though there has been a huge resurgence of interest in consciousness in the past decade, little attention has been paid to what the philosopher Immanuel Kant and others call the unity of consciousness. The unity of consciousness takes different forms, as we will see, but the general idea is that each of us is aware of many things in the world at the same time, and often many of one's own mental states and of oneself as their single common subject, too
 
Cassam, Quassim (1989). Kant and reductionism. Review of Metaphysics 43 (September):72-106.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Cleeremans, Axel (ed.) (2003). The Unity of Consciousness: Binding, Integration, and Dissociation. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 26 | Google | More links) 




 
Cotterill, Rodney M. J. (2003). Conscious unity, emotion, dreaming, and the solution of the hard problem. In Axel Cleeremans (ed.), The Unity of Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Cotterill, Rodney M. J. (1995). On the unity of conscious experience. Journal of Consciousness Studies 2 (4):290-311.   (Cited by 75 | Google) 
 
Dainton, Barry F. (2007). Coming together: The unity of conscious experience. In Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Dainton, Barry F. (2004). Higher-order consciousness and phenomenal space: Reply to Meehan. Psyche 10 (1).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Meehan finds fault with a number of my arguments, and proposes that better solutions to the problems I was addressing are available if we adopt a higher-order theory of consciousness. I start with some general remarks on theories of this sort. I connect what I had to say about the A-thesis with different forms of higher-order sense theories, and explain why I ignored higher-order thought theories altogether: there are compelling grounds for thinking they cannot provide a viable account of phenomenal unity in phenomenal terms. Meehan





 
Dainton, Barry F. (2004). Precis of Stream of Consciousness. Psyche 10 (1).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: That our ordinary everyday experience exhibits both unity and continuity is uncontroversial, and on the face of it utterly unmysterious. At any moment we have some conscious awareness of both the world about us, as revealed through our perceptual experiences, and our own inner states





 
Dainton, Barry F. (2004). Replies to commentators. Psyche.   (Google) 
 
Dainton, Barry F. (2000). Stream of Consciousness: Unity and Continuity in Conscious Experience. Routledge.   (Cited by 33 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Stream of Consciousness is about the phenomenology of conscious experience. Barry Dainton shows us that stream of consciousness is not a mosaic of discrete fragments of experience, but rather an interconnected flowing whole. Through a deep probing into the nature of awareness, introspection, phenomenal space and time consciousness, Dainton offers a truly original understanding of the nature of consciousness







 
Revonsuo, Antti (2003). The contents of phenomenal consciousness: One relation to rule them all and in the unity bind them. Psyche 9 (8).   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 





 
Dainton, Barry F. (2004). Unity and introspectibility: Reply to Gilmore. Psyche 10 (1).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Gilmore concentrates on two arguments which I took to undermine the claim that introspectibility is necessary for co-consciousness: the








 
Dainton, Barry F. (2004). Unity in the void: Reply to Revonsuo. Psyche 10 (1).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: While agreeing with me on many issues, Revonsuo rejects my claim that phenomenal states could be co-conscious without being spatially related (in experience). In defence of my claim I described a thought-experiment in which






 
Deweese-Boyd, Ian (online). Self-deception. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.   (Google)
Abstract: Virtually every aspect of the current philosophical discussion of self-deception is a matter of controversy including its definition and paradigmatic cases. We may say generally, however, that self-deception is the acquisition and maintenance of a belief (or, at least, the avowal of that belief) in the face of strong evidence to the contrary motivated by desires or emotions favoring the acquisition and retention of that belief. Beyond this, philosophers divide over whether this action is intentional or not, whether self-deceivers recognize the belief being acquired is unwarranted on the available evidence, whether self-deceivers are morally responsible for their self-deception, and whether self-deception is morally problematic (and if it is in what ways and under what circumstances). The discussion of self-deception and its associated puzzles gives us insight into the ways in which motivation affects belief acquisition and retention. And yet insofar as self-deception represents an obstacle to self-knowledge, which has potentially serious moral implications, self-deception is more than an interesting philosophical puzzle. It is a problem of particular concern for moral development, since self-deception can make us strangers to ourselves and blind to our own moral failings
 
Eccles, John C. (1985). The Brain and the Unity of Conscious Experience. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 13 | Google) 
 
Edwards, Jonathan C. W. (2005). Is consciousness only a property of individual cells? Journal of Consciousness Studies 12 (4-5):60-76.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: We perceive colour, shape, sound and touch 'bound together' in a single experience. The following arguments about this binding phenomenon are raised: (1) The individual signals passing from neurone to neurone are not bound together, whether as elements of information or physically. (2) Within a single cell, binding in terms of bringing together of information is potentially feasible. A physical substrate may also be available. (3) It is therefore proposed that a bound conscious experience must be a property of an individual cell, not of a group of cells. Since it is unlikely that one specific neurone is conscious, it is suggested that every neurone has a version of our consciousness, or at least some form of sentience. However absurd this may seem it appears to be consistent with the available evidence; arguably the only explanation that is. It probably does not alter the way we should expect to experience the world, but may help to explain the ways we seem to differ from digital computers and some of the paradoxes seen in mental illness. It predicts non-digital features of intracellular computation, for which there is already evidence, and which should be open to further experimental exploration. The arguments given may well prove flawed or the conclusion biologically or physically untenable, but the idea is raised for discussion not least because a formal demonstration that it is invalid may help to identify more fruitful avenues





 
Ellis, Ralph D. & Newton, Natika (2005). The unity of consciousness: An enactivist approach. Journal of Mind and Behavior 26 (4):225-280.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Feinberg, Todd E. (2000). The nested hierarchy of consciousness: A neurobiological solution to the problem of mental unity. Neurocase 6 (2):75-81.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Fox, Ivan (1985). The individualization of consciousness. Philosophical Topics 13 (3):119-43.   (Google) 
 
Gallagher, Shaun (2003). Sync-ing in the stream of experience sync-ing in the stream of experience: Time-consciousness in broad, Husserl, and Dainton. Psyche 9 (10).   (Google) 
 
Gennaro, Rocco J.; Herrmann, Douglas J. & Sarapata, Michael (2006). Aspects of the unity of consciousness and everyday memory failures. Consciousness and Cognition 15 (2):372-385.   (Google | More links) 





 
Gilmore, Cody S. (2003). The introspectibility thesis. Psyche 9 (5).   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: According to what Barry Dainton calls the 'Strong Introspectibility thesis', it is a necessary truth that mental states S and S* are co-conscious (experienced together) if and only if they are 'jointly introspectible', i.e., if and only if it is possible for there to be some single state of introspective awareness that represents both S and S*. Dainton offers two arguments for the conclusion that joint introspectibility is unnecessary for co-consciousness. In these comments I attempt to show, first, that Dainton's arguments fail, and, second, that joint introspectibility is actually insufficient for co-consciousness. (As to whether it is also unnecessary, I take no stance.)







 
Hamlyn, David W. (1996). The unity of the senses and self-consciousness. In D.W. Hamlyn (ed.), Understanding Perception: The Concept and its Conditions. Avebury Press.   (Google) 
 
Hasker, William (2009). Persons and the unity of consciousness. In Robert C. Koons & George Bealer (eds.), The Waning of Materialism: New Essays. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Hill, Christopher S. (1991). Unity of consciousness, other minds, and phenomenal space. In Sensations: A Defense of Type Materialism. Cambridge University Press.   (Google) 
 
Hughes, Bret Alan (online). The functioning hypothesis of consciousness.   (Google) 
 
Humphrey, N. (2000). One self: A meditation on the unity of consciousness. [Journal (Paginated)] 67 (4):1059-1066.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: What unites the many selves that constitute the human mind? How is the self-binding problem solved? I argue that separate selves come to belong together as one Self as a result of their dynamic participation in creating a single life, rather as the members of an orchestra come to belong together as a result of their jointly creating a single work of music







 
Humphrey, Nicholas (ms). One self: A meditation on the unity of consciousness. Social research, 67, no. 4, 32-39, 2000.   (Google)
Abstract: I am looking at my baby son, as he thrashes around in his crib, two arms flailing, hands grasping randomly, legs kicking the air, head and eyes turning this way and that, a smile followed by a grimace crossing his face. . . And I’m wondering: what is it like to be him? What is he feeling now? What kind of experience is he having of himself?
 
Hurley, Susan L. (2003). Action and the unity of consciousness. In Axel Cleeremans (ed.), The Unity of Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Hurley, Susan L. (2003). Action, the unity of consciousness, and vehicle externalism. In Axel Cleeremans (ed.), The Unity of Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Hurley, Susan L. (1996). Myth upon myth. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 96:253-260.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Hurley, Susan L. (1994). Unity and objectivity. In Christopher Peacocke (ed.), Objectivity, Simulation, and the Unity of Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 40 | Google) 
 
Hurley, Susan L. (1998). Unity, neuropsychology, and action. In Consciousness in Action. Harvard University Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
James, William (1895). The knowing of things together. Psychological Review 2:105-24.   (Cited by 12 | Google) 
 
Janew, Claus (2009). Omnipresent Consciousness and Free Will. In How Consciousness Creates Reality. CreateSpace.   (Google)
Abstract: This article is not an attempt to explain consciousness in terms basically of quantum physics or neuro-biology. Instead I should like to place the term "Consciousness" on a broader footing. I shall therefore proceed from everyday reality, precisely where we experience ourselves as conscious beings. I shall use the term in such a general way as to resolve the question whether only a human being enjoys consciousness, or even a thermostat. Whilst the difference is considerable, it is not fundamental. Every effect exists in the perception of a consciousness. I elaborate on its freedom of choice, in my view the most important source of creativity, in a similarly general way. The problems associated with a really conscious decision do not disappear by mixing determination with a touch of coincidence. Both must enter into a higher unity. In so doing it will emerge that a certain degree of freedom of choice is just as omnipresent as consciousness - an inherent part of reality itself.






























 
Kennett, Jeanette & Matthews, Steve (2003). The unity and disunity of agency. Philosophy, Psychiatry, and Psychology 10 (4):308-312.   (Cited by 8 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Effective agency, according to contemporary Kantians, requires a unity of purpose both at a time, in order that we may eliminate conflict among our motives, and over time, because many of the things we do form part of longer-term projects and make sense only in the light of these projects and life plans. Call this the unity of agency thesis. This thesis can be regarded as a normative constraint on accounts of personal identity and indeed on accounts of what it is to have the life of a person in the broad, rather than narrowly biological sense. It is also a fundamental condition of social life that persons within society fulfill a range of longitudinal roles: parenthood is one such obvious example, as are teachers, health professionals, engineers, artists, and many others. The fulfillment of these and other valuable social roles requires that agents have the capacity to rationally conceive of themselves as engaged in these roles and subject to the demands of them. To be unable to fulfill any such longitudinal social roles is to have a life deficient in value. The unity of agency is thus, we argue, something we rationally strive for, and something to be morally promoted. Psychiatric states that undermine the unity of agency are morally and rationally disvaluable. Using the example of dissociation, we explain how one such state may have this undermining or disruptive effect on the unity of agency. The therapeutic ends for psychiatry in conditions involving such states are thus seen more globally as the restoration of effective agency, that is, unified agency.





 
Kim, Chin-Tai (1978). Brentano on the unity of mental phenomena. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 39 (December):199-207.   (Google | More links) 





 
Kim, Chin-Tai (1971). Cartesian dualism and the unity of a mind. Mind 80 (July):337-353.   (Google | More links) 





 
Kobes, Bernard W. (2005). Review of Michael Tye's Consciousness and Persons. Psyche 11 (5).   (Google)
Abstract: Consciousness has been defined as that annoying period between naps, and this grumpy definition may not be wholly facetious, if Michael Tye's latest book is right. Tye's main goal here is to develop a theory of the phenomenal unity of experience at a time, and its diachronic analog, the moment-to-moment continuity of one's experiential stream from the time one wakes up to the time consciousness lapses
 
Kobes, Bernard W. (2000). Unity of consciousness and bi-level externalism. Mind and Language 15 (5):528-544.   (Google | More links) 







 
LaRock, Eric (2007). Disambiguation, binding, and the unity of visual consciousness. Theory and Psychology 17 (6):747-77.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 




 
LaRock, Eric (2007). Intrinsic perspectives, object feature binding, and visual consciousness. Theory and Psychology 17 (6):799-09.   (Google | More links) 




 
LaRock, Eric F. (2006). Why neural synchrony fails to explain the unity of visual consciousness. Behavior and Philosophy 34:39-58.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Lockwood, Michael (1994). Issues of unity and objectivity. In Christopher Peacocke (ed.), Objectivity, Simulation, and the Unity of Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Marks, Charles E. (1980). Commissurotomy, Consciousness, and Unity of Mind. MIT Press.   (Cited by 29 | Google | More links) 




 
Mark Baldwin, J. (1909). Motor processes and mental unity. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 6 (7):182-185.   (Google | More links) 




 
Marcel, Anthony J. (1993). Slippage in the unity of consciousness. In Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Consciousness. (Ciba Foundation Symposium 174).   (Cited by 65 | Google) 
 
Marks, L. E. (1978). The Unity of the Senses: Interrelations Among the Modalities. Academic Press.   (Cited by 179 | Google) 
 
Marcel, Anthony J. (1994). What is relevant to the unity of consciousness? In Christopher Peacocke (ed.), Objectivity, Simulation, and the Unity of Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 13 | Google) 
 
Matsuda, M.; Hara, T.; Okunishi, E. & Nishida, M. (2007). High-angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy of the antiphase boundary in a rapidly solidified b2 type tipd compound. Philosophical Magazine Letters 87 (1):59-64.   (Google) 
 
Maxwell, Grover (1978). Unity of consciousness and mind-brain identity. In John C. Eccles (ed.), Mind and Brain. Paragon House.   (Google) 
 
McInerney, Peter K. (1985). Person-stages and unity of consciousness. American Philosophical Quarterly 22 (July):197-209.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Meehan, Douglas B. (2003). Phenomenal space and the unity of conscious experience. Psyche 9 (12).   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Menon, Sangeetha (2009). Persistent Puzzles of Consciousness: What is it? Where is it? In Ramakrishna Mission (ed.), Understanding Consciousness - Recent Advances.   (Google) 
 
Montecucco, Nitamo Federico (2006). Coherence, brain evolution, and the unity of consciousness: The evolution of planetary consciousness in the light of brain coherence research. World Futures 62 (1 & 2):127 – 133.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The law of coherence helps us understand the physical force behind the increasing complexity of the evolutionary process, from quanta, to cells, to self-awareness and collective consciousness. The coherent electromagnetic field is the inner glue of every system, the "intelligent" energy-information communication that assures a cooperative and synergic behavior to all the components of the system, as a whole, allowing harmonious evolution and unity of consciousness. Neuropsychological experiments show that the different brain areas communicate with more or less coherence according to different states of consciousness: high values are correlated with states of psychophysical integrity and well-being, whereas low values with states of conflict and depression. If we expand isomorphically these brain discoveries, we will have four main general states of coherence: from disgregation to unity, which represents an important element, in the General System Theory, to differentiate between inanimate and animate system, and to understand how billions cells become a single living organism, and then how billions of human beings could eventually generate planetary consciousness. In this light the resolution of the global ecosystem crisis implicates human transformation from a low to a highly coherent state of consciousness. The key to the entire process seems to be the coherent nature of consciousness





 
Montgomery, Edmund (1895). The integration of mind. Mind 4 (15):307-319.   (Google | More links) 






 
Morrison, Ronald P. (1978). Kant, Husserl, and Heidegger on time and the unity of "consciousness". Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 39 (2):182-198.   (Google | More links) 




 
Nagel, Thomas (1971). Brain bisection and the unity of consciousness. Synthese 22 (May):396-413.   (Cited by 62 | Google | More links) 




 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1984). Concerning the unity of consciousness: I. Varieties of Conscious Unity. Imagination, Cognition and Personality 3:281-303.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1986). Concerning the unity of consciousness: . William James on personal conscious unity. Imagination, Cognition And Personality 5:21-30.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1979). The unity of consciousness. Behaviorism 7:45-63.   (Cited by 7 | Google) 
 
Nikolinakos, Drakon (2004). Anosognosia and the unity of consciousness. Philosophical Studies 119 (3):315-342.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Oaklander, L. Nathan (1987). Parfit, circularity, and the unity of consciousness. Mind 96 (October):525-29.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Oakley, David A. & Eames, L. C. (1986). The plurality of consciousness. In David A. Oakley (ed.), Mind and Brain. Methuen.   (Cited by 15 | Google) 
 
O'Brien, Gerard & Opie, Jonathan (2000). Disunity defended: A reply to Bayne. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 78 (2):255-263.   (Google) 
 
O'Brien, Gerard & Opie, Jonathan (1998). The disunity of consciousness. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 76 (3):378-95.   (Google | More links) 






 
O'Brien, Gerard & Opie, Jonathan (2003). The multiplicity of consciousness and the emergence of the self. In A.S. David & T. T. J. Kircher (eds.), The Self and Schizophrenia: A Neuropsychological Perspective. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links)
Abstract: I look out the window and I think that the garden looks nice and the grass looks cool, but the
 thoughts of Eammon Andrews come into my mind





 
O'Dea, John (2008). Transparency and the unity of experience. In E. Wright (ed.), The Case for Qualia. MIT Press.   (Google)
Abstract: If we assume that the operation of each sense modality constitutes a different experience – a visual experience, an auditory experience, etc – we are faced with the problem of how those distinct experiences come together to form a unified perceptual encounter with the world. Michael Tye has recently argued that the best way to get around this problem is to deny altogether that there are such things as purely visual (and so forth) experiences. Here I aim to show not simply that Tye’s proposed solution fails, but that its failure is highly instructive because it allows us to see that the transparency thesis, which lies at the heart of the case against qualia, and of most representationalist theories of experience, is more problematic than is often supposed
 
O'Shaughnessy, Brian (1992). The diversity and unity of action and perception. In Tim Crane (ed.), The Contents of Experience. Cambridge University Press.   (Google) 
 
Peterson, Charles W. (2003). Unity of consciousness in Schlick. Dialogue 45 (2-3):57-60.   (Google) 
 
Picard, Maurice (1921). The unity of consciousness. Journal of Philosophy 18 (13):347-357.   (Google | More links) 





 
Pincock, Christopher (web). Accounting for the unity of experience in Dilthey, Rickert, Bradley and ward. In U. Feest (ed.), Historical Perspectives on Erkl. Max Planck Institute for the History of Science.   (Google)
Abstract: Forthcoming in U. Feest (ed.), Historical Perspectives on Erkl
 
Radden, Jennifer (2003). Learning from disunity. Philosophy, Psychiatry, and Psychology 10 (4):357-359.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 




 
Radden, Jennifer (1998). Pathologically divided minds, synchronic unity and models of self. Journal of Consciousness Studies 5 (5-6):658-672.   (Cited by 11 | Google) 
 
Revonsuo, Antti (1999). Binding and the phenomenal unity of consciousness. Consciousness and Cognition 8 (2):173-85.   (Cited by 15 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The binding problem is frequently discussed in consciousness research. However, it is by no means clear what the problem is supposed to be and how exactly it relates to consciousness. In the present paper the nature of the binding problem is clarified by distinguishing between different formulations of the problem. Some of them make no mention of consciousness, whereas others are directly related to aspects of phenomenal experience. Certain formulations of the binding problem are closely connected to the classical philosophical problem of the unity of consciousness and the currently fashionable search for the neural correlates of consciousness. Nonetheless, only a part of the current empirical research on binding is directly relevant to the study of consciousness. The main message of the present paper is that the science of consciousness needs to establish a clear theoretical view of the relation between binding and consciousness and to encourage further empirical work that builds on such a theoretical foundation





 
Revonsuo, Antti & Tarkko, K. (2002). Binding in dreams: The bizarreness of dream images and the unity of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 9 (7):3-24.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Rossman, Neil I. (1991). Consciousness: Separation and Integration. SUNY Press.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 





 
Rosenberg, Jay F. (1997). Kantian schemata and the unity of perception. In Language and Thought. Hawthorne: De Gruyter.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Rosenberg, Gregg H. (1998). The boundary problem for phenomenal individuals. In Stuart R. Hameroff, Alfred W. Kaszniak & A. C. Scott (eds.), Toward a Science of Consciousness: The First Tucson Discussions and Debates (Complex Adaptive Systems). MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
Rosenberg, Gregg H. (2004). The boundary problem for experiencing subjects. In A Place for Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (2003). Unity of consciousness and the self. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 103 (3):325-352.   (Cited by 10 | Google | More links) 







 
Rutgers Marshall, Henry (1902). The unity of process in consciousness. Mind 11 (44):470-502.   (Google | More links) 




 
Schrader, Warren (online). A unity of consciousness argument against causal emergence.   (Google) 
 
Schleichert, Hubert (1985). On the concept of unity of consciousness. Synthese 64 (September):411-20.   (Google | More links) 




 
Schachter, Josef (2002). Pierre Bayle, matter, and the unity of consciousness. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 32 (2):241-266.   (Google) 
 
Shand, Alexander F. (1888). The unity of consciousness. Mind 13 (50):231-243.   (Google | More links) 





 
Shoemaker, Sydney (2003). Consciousness and co-consciousness. In Axel Cleeremans (ed.), The Unity of Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1996). Unity of consciousness and consciousness of unity. In The First-Person Perspective and Other Essays. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 13 | Google) 
 
Shrader, Warren (2006). The unity of consciousness: Trouble for the materialist or the emergent dualist? Faith and Philosophy 23 (1):33-44.   (Google)
Abstract: As part of his case for emergent dualism, William Hasker proffers a _unity-of-_ _consciousness_ (UOC) argument against materialism. I formalize the argument and show how the warrant for two of its premises accrues from the warrant one assigns to two distinct theses about unified conscious experience. I then argue that though both unity theses are plausible, the materialist has little to fear from Hasker
 
Shrader, Warren (ms). What is the unity of consciousness argument?   (Google) 
 
Stevenson, Leslie F. (2000). Synthetic unities of experience. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 60 (2):281-306.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Tinnin, Louis (1990). Mental unity, altered states of consciousness, and dissociation. Dissociation 3:154-59.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Tomy, C. A. (2003). An argument for the unity of consciousness. In Perspectives on Consciousness. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.   (Google) 
 
Tye, Michael (2007). The problem of common sensibles. In Ralph Schumacher (ed.), Perception and Status of Secondary Qualities. Kluwer.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In _On The Soul_ (425a-b), Aristotle drew a distinction between those qualities that are perceptible only via a single sense and those that are perceptible by more than one. The latter qualities he called





 
Varela, F. & Thompson, Evan (2003). Neural synchrony and the unity of mind: A neurophenomenological perspective. In Axel Cleeremans (ed.), The Unity of Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 14 | Google) 
 
von der Malsburg, Christoph (1997). The coherence definition of consciousness. In M. Ito, Y. Miyashita & Edmund T. Rolls (eds.), [Book Chapter]. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 16 | Google | More links)
Abstract: I will focus in this essay on a riddle that in my view is central to the consciousness issue: How does the mind or brain create the unity we perceive out of the diversity that we know is there? I contend this is a technical issue, not a philosophical one, although its resolution will have profound philosophical repercussions, and although we have at present little more than the philosophical method to attack it











 
Ward, Andrew (1980). Materialism and the unity of consciousness. Analysis 40 (June):144-46.   (Google) 
 
Watkins, J. W. N. (1982). A basic difficulty in the mind-brain identity hypothesis. In John C. Eccles (ed.), Mind and Brain. Paragon House.   (Google) 
 
Weisberg, Josh (2001). The appearance of unity: A higher-order interpretation of the unity of consciousness. Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual Conference of The.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: subjective appearance of unity, but respects unity can be adequately dealt with by the theory. I the actual and potential disunity of the brain will close by briefly considering some worries about processes that underwrite consciousness. eliminativism that often accompany discussions of unity and consciousness





 
Weiner, Scott E. (2003). Unity of agency and volition: Some personal reflections. Philosophy, Psychiatry, and Psychology 10 (4):369-372.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 




 
Zeki, Semir (2003). The disunity of consciousness. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 7 (5):214-218.   (Cited by 41 | Google | More links) 









 
1.6c Homogeneity of Consciousness 

15 / 16 entries displayed





Byrne, Alex (2005). Knowing our minds. Boston Review.   (Google)
Abstract: ancient Greek temple at Delphi and is quoted approvingly by Socrates in the _First_
 
Clark, Austen (1989). The particulate instantiation of homogeneous pink. Synthese 80 (August):277-304.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: If one examines the sky at sunset on a clear night, one seems to see a continuum of colors from reds, oranges and yellows to a deep blue-black. Between any two colored points in the sky there seem to be other colored points. Furthermore, the changes in color across the sky appear to be continuous. Although the colors at the zenith and the horizon are obviously distinct, nowhere in the sky can one see any color borders, and every sufficiently small region of the sky is made up of regions that all seem to be of the same color






 
Cornman, James W. (1970). Sellars, scientific realism, and sensa. Review of Metaphysics 23 (March):417-51.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Delaney, Cornelius F. (1971). Sellars' grain argument. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 50 (1):14-16.   (Google | More links) 






 
Friedman, Stephen (1989). Ultimate homogeneity: A dialogue. Philosophy Research Archives 14:425-53.   (Google) 
 
Gunderson, Keith (1974). The texture of mentality. In Renford Bambrough (ed.), Wisdom: Twelve Essays. Blackwell.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Huemer, Michael (2004). Elusive freedom? A reply to Helen Beebee. Philosophical Review 113 (3):411-416.   (Google | More links) 






 
Lockwood, Michael (1993). The grain problem. In Howard M. Robinson (ed.), Objections to Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 19 | Annotation | Google)




  
Lycan, William G. (1987). Sellars' "grain" argument. In W.G. Lycan (ed.), Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
Metzinger, Thomas (1995). Faster than thought: Holism, homogeneity, and temporal coding. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Ferdinand Schoningh.   (Cited by 36 | Google) 
 
Nichols, Shaun & Stich, Stephen P. (2005). Reading one's own mind: Self-awareness and developmental psychology. In M. Ezcurdia, R. Stainton & C. Viger (eds.), New Essays in Philosophy of Language and Mind. University of Calgary Press.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The idea that we have special access to our own mental states has a distinguished philosophical history. Philosophers as different as Descartes and Locke agreed that we know our own minds in a way that is quite different from the way in which we know other minds. In the latter half of the 20th century, however, this idea came under serious attack, first from philosophy (Sellars 1956) and more recently from developmental psychology.1 The attack from developmental psychology arises from the growing body of work on






 
Revonsuo, Antti (2003). The contents of phenomenal consciousness: One relation to rule them all and in the unity bind them. Psyche 9 (8).   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 





 
Richardson, Robert C. & Muilenberg, G. (1982). Sellars and sense impressions. Erkenntnis 17 (March):171-212.   (Google | More links) 




 
Sellars, Wilfrid S. (1963). Philosophy and the scientific image of man. In Robert Colodny (ed.), Science, Perception, and Reality. Humanities Press/Ridgeview.   (Cited by 94 | Google) 
 
Sellars, Wilfrid S. (1971). Seeing, sense impressions, and sensa: A reply to Cornman. Review of Metaphysics 24 (March):391-447.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
1.6d Knowledge of Consciousness




Alter, Torin (2009). Does the ignorance hypothesis undermine the conceivability and knowledge arguments? Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 79 (3):756-765.   (Google) 
 
Alter, Torin (web). Phenomenal knowledge without experience. In E. Wright (ed.), The Case for Qualia. MIT Press.   (Google)
Abstract: Phenomenal knowledge usually comes from experience. But it 
need not. For example, one could know what it’s like to see red without 
seeing red—indeed, without having any color experiences. Daniel Dennett 
(2007) and Pete Mandik (forthcoming) argue that this and related 
considerations undermine the knowledge argument against physicalism. 
If they are right, then this is not only a problem for anti‐physicalists. Their 
argument threatens to undermine any version of phenomenal realism—
the view that there are phenomenal properties, or qualia, that are not 
conceptually reducible to physical or functional properties. I will argue 
that this threat is illusory. Explaining why will clarify what is and is not at issue in discussions of the knowledge argument and phenomenal realism. This will strengthen the case for physically and functionally irreducible qualia. 

 
Aydede, Murat (2003). Is introspection inferential? In Brie Gertler (ed.), Privileged Access: Philosophical Accounts of Self-Knowledge. Ashgate.   (Cited by 10 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Suppose there is a red ball against a uniformly gray background moving toward my left. I am seeing the moving red ball. I am having a visual experience that carries the information (among other things) that [the ball] is red.1 Now supposing that I have the concepts RED and SEEING, and all my other cognitive (including introspective) mechanisms are intact and working normally, the job is to say exactly how I do come to know that I am seeing [the ball] as red. How do I come to know, as I shall sometimes put it, that I am seeing red?






 
Balog, Katalin (forthcoming). Acquaintance and the mind-body problem. In Christopher Hill & Simone Gozzano (eds.), Identity Theory. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: In this paper I begin to develop an account of the acquaintance that each of us has with our own conscious states and processes. The account is a speculative proposal about human mental architecture and specifically about the nature of the concepts via which we think in first personish ways about our qualia. In a certain sense my account is neutral between physicalist and dualist accounts of consciousness. As will be clear, a dualist could adopt the account I will offer while maintaining that qualia themselves are non-physical properties. In this case the non-physical nature of qualia may play no role in accounting for the features of acquaintance. But although the account could be used by a dualist, its existence provides enormous support for physicalism. In particular it provides the makings of a positive refutation (i.e., a refutation by construction) of the conceivability arguments and the Mary argument for dualism.
 
Baruss, Imants (1998). Beliefs about consciousness and reality of participants at 'tucson II'. Journal of Consciousness Studies 5 (4):483-496.   (Google) 
 
Bayne, Timothy J. (2001). Chalmers on the justification of phenomenal judgments. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 62 (2):407-19.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Bayer, Benjamin (ms). From folk psychology to folk epistemology: The status of radical simulation.   (Google)
Abstract: In this paper I consider one of the leading philosophic-psychological theories of “folk psychology,” the simulation theory of Robert Gordon. According to Gordon, we attribute mental states to others not by representing those states or by applying the generalizations of theory, but by imagining ourselves in the position of a target to be interpreted and exploiting our own decision-making skills to make assertions which we then attribute to others as ‘beliefs’. I describe a leading objections to Gordon’s theory—the problem of adjustment—and show how a charitably interpreted Gordon could answer this objection. I conclude, however, that the best case for Gordon’s position still runs into a new problem concerning the epistemological presuppositions of belief-attribution. This suggests a new account of folk psychological explanation that draws on children’s basic folk epistemological knowledge. Identifying this new alternative helps undermine the simplicity of a theory based on simulation-based explanation
 
Bouratinos, E. (2003). A pre-epistemology of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 10 (12):38-41.   (Google) 
 
Bradley, Raymond D. (1964). Avowals of immediate experience. Mind 73 (April):186-203.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Bradley, Francis H. (1909). On our knowledge of immediate experience. Mind 18 (69):40-64.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Bush, Wendell T. (1906). The privacy of consciousness. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 3 (2):42-45.   (Google | More links) 





 
Carloye, Jack C. (1991). Consciousness and introspective knowledge. Methodology and Science 8:8-22.   (Google) 
 
Chalmers, David J. (1996). The paradox of phenomenal judgment. In The Conscious Mind. Oxford University Press.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Clark, Thomas W. (2005). Killing the observer. Journal of Consciousness Studies 12 (4-5):38-59.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Phenomenal consciousness is often thought to involve a first-person perspective or point of view which makes available to the subject categorically private, first-person facts about experience, facts that are irreducible to third-person physical, functional, or representational facts. This paper seeks to show that on a representational account of consciousness, we don't have an observational perspective on experience that gives access to such facts, although our representational limitations and the phenomenal structure of consciousness make it strongly seem that we do. Qualia seem intrinsic and functionally arbitrary, and thus categorically private, because they are first-order sensory representations that are not themselves directly represented. Further, the representational architecture that on this account instantiates conscious subjectivity helps to generate the intuition of observerhood, since the phenomenal subject may be construed as outside, not within, experience. Once the seemings of private phenomenal facts and the observing subject are discounted, we can understand consciousness as a certain variety of neurally instantiated, behaviour controlling content, that constituted by an integrated representation of the organism in the world. Neuroscientific research suggests that consciousness and its characteristic behavioural capacities are supported by widely distributed but highly integrated neural processes involving communication between multiple functional sub- systems in the brain. This 'global workspace' may be the brain's physical realization of the representational architecture that constitutes consciousness






 
Conee, Earl (1994). Phenomenal knowledge. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 72 (2):136-150.   (Cited by 23 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 







 
Dennett, Daniel C. (2002). How could I be wrong? How wrong could I be? Journal of Consciousness Studies 9 (5):13-16.   (Cited by 14 | Google | More links)
Abstract: One of the striking, even amusing, spectacles to be enjoyed at the many workshops and conferences on consciousness these days is the breathtaking overconfidence with which laypeople hold forth about the nature of consciousness Btheir own in particular, but everybody =s by extrapolation. Everybody =s an expert on consciousness, it seems, and it doesn =t take any knowledge of experimental findings to secure the home truths these people enunciate with such conviction






 
Dilworth, John B. (2006). Perception, introspection, and functional consonance. Theoria 72 (4):299-318.   (Google)
Abstract: What is the relation between a perceptual experience of an object X as being red, and one's belief, if any, as to the nature of that experience? A traditional Cartesian view would be that, if indeed object X does seem to be red to oneself, then one's resulting introspective belief about it could only be a _conforming _belief, i.e., a belief that X perceptually seems to be _red _to oneself--rather than, for instance, a belief that X perceptually seems to be green to oneself instead. On such a Cartesian view, our introspective certainly about our own thoughts extends also to our perceptual experiences as to how things seem to be to us, so that our resulting introspective beliefs about our phenomenal states also count as knowledge of them
 
Dretske, Fred (2003). How do you know you are not a zombie? In Brie Gertler (ed.), Privileged Access: Philosophical Accounts of Self-Knowledge. Ashgate.   (Cited by 19 | Google) 
 
Dretske, Fred (1999). The mind's awareness of itself. Philosophical Studies 95 (1-2):103-24.   (Cited by 35 | Google | More links) 






 
Eilan, Naomi M. & Roessler, Johannes (2003). Agency and self-awareness: Mechanisms and epistemology. In Johannes Roessler (ed.), Agency and Self-Awareness: Issues in Philosophy and Psychology. Oxford: Clarendon Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Fischer, Eugen (2001). Discrimination: A challenge to first-person authority? Philosophical Investigations 24 (4):330-346.   (Google) 
 
Francescotti, Robert M. (2000). Introspection and qualia: A defense of infallibility. Communication and Cognition 33 (3-4):161-173.   (Google) 
 
Gertler, Brie (2003). How to draw ontological conclusions from introspective data. In Brie Gertler (ed.), Privileged Access: Philosophical Accounts of Self-Knowledge. Ashgate.   (Google) 
 
Gertler, Brie (2001). Introspecting phenomenal states. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 63 (2):305-28.   (Cited by 15 | Google | More links) 






 
Hellie, Benj (2009). Acquaintance. In Tim Bayne, Axel Cleeremans & Patrick Wilken (eds.), Oxford Companion to Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Hellie, Benj (2010). An externalist's guide to inner experience. In Bence Nanay (ed.), Perceiving the World. Oxford University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: Let's be externalists about perceptual consciousness and think the form of veridical perceptual consciousness includes /seeing this or that mind-independent particular and its colors/. Let's also take internalism seriously, granting that spectral inversion and hallucination can be "phenomenally" the same as normal seeing. Then perceptual consciousness and phenomenality are different, and so we need to say how they are related. It's complicated!

Phenomenal sameness is (against all odds) /reflective indiscriminability/. I build a "displaced perception" account of reflection on which indiscriminability stems from shared "qualia". Qualia are compatible with direct realism: while they generate an explanatory gap (and colors do not), so does /seeing/; qualia are excluded from perceptual consciousness by its "transparency"; instead, qualia are aspects of thought about the perceived environment. 

The asymmetry between my treatments of color and seeing is grounded in the asymmetry between ignorance and error: while inversion shows that normal subjects are ignorant of the natures of the colors, hallucination shows not that perceivers are ignorant of the nature of seeing but that hallucinators are prone to error about their condition. Past literature has treated inversion and hallucination as on a par: externalists see error in both cases, while internalists see mutual ignorance. My account is so complicated because plausible results require mixing it up.
 
Hellie, Benj (2007). Factive phenomenal characters. Philosophical Perspectives 21 (1):259--306.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper expands on the discussion in the first section of 'Beyond phenomenal naivete'. Let Phenomenal Naivete be understood as the doctrine that some phenomenal characters of veridical experiences are factive properties concerning the external world. Here I present in detail a phenomenological case for Phenomenal Naivete and an argument from hallucination against it. I believe that these arguments show the concept of phenomenal character to be defective, overdetermined by its metaphysical and epistemological commitments together with the world. This does not establish a gappish eliminativism, but a gluttish pluralism, on which there are many imperfect deservers of the name 'phenomenal character'. Different projects in the philosophy of mind -- phenomenology, philosophy of conscious, metaphysics and epistemology of perception -- are concerned with different deservers of the name.





 
Hellie, Benj (2007). Higher-order intentionalism and higher-order acquaintance. Philosophical Studies 134 (3):289--324.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: I argue against such "Relation Intentionalist" theories of consciousness as the higher-order thought and inner sense views on the grounds that they understand a subject's awareness of his or her phenomenal characters to be intentional, like seeming-seeing, rather than "direct", like seeing. The trouble with such views is that they reverse the order of explanation between phenomenal character and intentional awareness. A superior theory of consciousness, based on views expressed by Russell and Price, takes the relation of awareness to be a nonintentional "acquaintance".







 
Hellie, Benj (2005). Noise and perceptual indiscriminability. Mind 114 (455):481-508.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Perception represents colors inexactly. This inexactness results from phenomenally manifest noise, and results in apparent violations of the transitivity of perceptual indiscriminability. Whether these violations are genuine depends on what is meant by 'transitivity of perceptual indiscriminability'.






 
Hellie, Benj (forthcoming). The multidisjunctive conception of hallucination. In Fiona Mapherson (ed.), Hallucination. MIT Press.   (Google)
Abstract: Direct realists think that we can't get a clear view the nature of /hallucinating a white picket fence/: is it /representing a white picket fence/? is it /sensing white-picket-fencily/? is it /being acquainted with a white' picketed' sense-datum/? These are all epistemic possibilities for a single experience; hence they are all metaphysical possibilities for various experiences. Hallucination itself is a disjunctive or "multidisjunctive" category. I rebut MGF Martin's argument from statistical explanation for his "epistemic" conception of hallucination, but his view embeds in my view as a "reference-fixer".
 
Hill, Christopher S. (1988). Introspective awareness of sensations. Topoi 7 (March):11-24.   (Google | More links) 




 
Hofmann, Frank (2009). Introspective self-knowledge of experience and evidence. Erkenntnis 71 (1).   (Google)
Abstract: The paper attempts to give an account of the introspective self-knowledge of our own experiences which is in line with representationalism about phenomenal consciousness and the transparency of experience. A two-step model is presented. First, a demonstrative thought of the form ‚I am experiencing this’ is formed which refers to what one experiences, by means of attention. Plausibly, this thought is knowledge, since safe. Second, a non-demonstrative thought of the form ‚I am experiencing a pain’ occurs. This second self-ascription is justified inferentially, on the basis of the first, demonstrative thought. Thus, an account of introspective experiential self-knowledge can be developed which is richer and more adequate to the phenomena than pure reliabilism and Dretske’s displaced perception model. There is really such a thing as introspection, but no inner sense
 
Horgan, Terry; Tienson, John & Graham, George (2006). Internal-world skepticism and the self-presentational nature of phenomenal consciousness. In Uriah Kriegel & Kenneth Williford (eds.), Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Howell, Robert J. (2010). Subjectivity and the elusiveness of the self. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 40 (3):pp. 459-483.   (Google | More links) 




 
Imlay, Robert A. (1969). Immediate awareness. Dialogue 8 (September):228-42.   (Google) 
 
Kirk, Robert E. (1971). Armstrong's analogue of introspection. Philosophical Quarterly 21 (April):158-62.   (Google | More links) 





 
Kneale, William C. (1950). Experience and introspection. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 50:I.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Horgan, Terry & Kriegel, Uriah (2007). Phenomenal epistemology: What is consciousness that we may know it so well? Philosophical Issues 17 (1):123-144.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: It has often been thought that our knowledge of ourselves is _different_ from, perhaps in some sense _better_ than, our knowledge of things other than ourselves. Indeed, there is a thriving research area in epistemology dedicated to seeking an account of self-knowledge that would articulate and explain its difference from, and superiority over, other knowledge. Such an account would thus illuminate the descriptive and normative difference between self-knowledge and other knowledge.<sup>1</sup> At the same time, self- knowledge has also encountered its share of skeptics – philosophers who refuse to accord it any descriptive, let alone normative, distinction. In this paper, we argue that there is at least one _species_ of self-knowledge that is different from, and better than, other knowledge. It is a specific kind of knowledge of one’s concurrent phenomenal experiences. Call knowledge of one’s own phenomenal experiences _phenomenal knowledge_. Our claim is that some (though not all) phenomenal knowledge is different from, and better than, non-phenomenal knowledge. In other





 
Langsam, Harold (2002). Consciousness, experience, and justification. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 31 (1):1-28.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Leeds, Stephen (1993). Qualia, awareness, Sellars. Noûs 27 (3):303-330.   (Cited by 9 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Lehrer, Keith (2006). Consciousness, representation, and knowledge. In Uriah Kriegel & Kenneth Williford (eds.), Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
Lemos, Ramon M. (1965). Immediacy, privacy, and ineffability. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 25 (June):500-515.   (Google | More links) 





 
Levine, Joseph (2003). Knowing what it's like. In Brie Gertler (ed.), Privileged Access: Philosophical Accounts of Self-Knowledge. Ashgate.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 




 
Maund, J. Barry (1976). Awareness of sensory experience. Mind 85 (July):412-416.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1989). An examination of four objections to self-intimating states of consciousness. Journal of Mind and Behavior 10:63-116.   (Cited by 12 | Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1977). Consciousness: Consideration of an inferential hypothesis. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour 7 (April):29-39.   (Cited by 37 | Google | More links) 




 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1988). Is any state of consciousness self-intimating? Journal of Mind and Behavior 9:167-203.   (Cited by 7 | Google) 
 
Parsons, Kathryn P. (1970). Mistaking sensations. Philosophical Review 79 (April):201-213.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 





 
Robinson, William S. (1982). Causation, sensations, and knowledge. Mind 91 (October):524-40.   (Cited by 8 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Rosenthal, David M. (1995). Self-knowledge and Moore's paradox. Philosophical Studies 77 (2-3).   (Google) 
 
Schwitzgebel, Eric (2000). How well do we know our own conscious experience? The case of human echolocation. Philosophical Topics 28 (5-6):235-46.   (Cited by 12 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Researchers from the 1940's through the present have found that normal, sighted people can echolocate - that is, detect properties of silent objects by attending to sound reflected from them. We argue that echolocation is a normal part of our conscious, perceptual experience. Despite this, we argue that people are often grossly mistaken about their experience of echolocation. If so, echolocation provides a counterexample to the view that we cannot be seriously mistaken about our own current conscious experience













 
Schwitzgebel, Eric (2002). How well do we know our own conscious experience? The case of visual imagery. Journal of Consciousness Studies 9 (5):35-53.   (Cited by 35 | Google | More links) 




 
Schwitzgebel, Eric (2007). No unchallengeable epistemic authority, of any sort, regarding our own conscious experience. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 6 (1-2).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Dennett argues that we can be mistaken about our own conscious experience. Despite this, he repeatedly asserts that we can or do have unchallengeable authority of some sort in our reports about that experience. This assertion takes three forms. First, Dennett compares our authority to the authority of an author over his fictional world. Unfortunately, that appears to involve denying that there are actual facts about experience that subjects may be truly or falsely reporting. Second, Dennett sometimes seems to say that even though we may be mistaken about what our conscious experience is, our reports about







 
Schick, Theodore W. (1992). The epistemic role of qualitative content. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 52 (2):383-93.   (Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Shear, Jonathan & Gallagher, Shaun (eds.) (1999). Models of the Self. Imprint Academic.   (Google) 
 
Siewert, Charles (2001). Self-knowledge and phenomenal unity. Noûs 35 (4):542-68.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 






 
Smart, J. J. C. (1971). Reports of immediate experiences. Synthese 22 (May):346-359.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 




 
Sosa, Ernest (2003). Consciousness and self-knowledge. In Brie Gertler (ed.), Privileged Access: Philosophical Accounts of Self-Knowledge. Ashgate.   (Google) 
 
Sprigge, Timothy L. S. (1981). Knowledge of subjectivity. Theoria to Theory 14 (June):313-25.   (Google) 
 
Tibbetts, Paul E. (1972). Feigl on raw feels, the brain, and knowledge claims: Some problems regarding theoretical concepts. Dialectica 26:247-66.   (Google | More links) 




 
van Gulick, Robert (2000). Inward and upward: Reflection, introspection, and self-awareness. Philosophical Topics 28:275-305.   (Cited by 19 | Google) 
 
Wallraff, Charles F. (1953). On immediacy and the contemporary dogma of sense-certainty. Journal of Philosophy 50 (January):29-38.   (Google | More links) 





 
Warner, Richard (1996). Facing ourselves: Incorrigibility and the mind-body problem. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (3):217-30.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 




 
Warner, Richard (1994). In defense of a dualism. In Richard Warner & Tadeusz Szubka (eds.), The Mind-Body Problem: A Guide to the Current Debate. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
White, Alan R. (1981). Knowledge, acquaintance, and awareness. Midwest Studies in Philosophy 6:159-172.   (Google) 
 
1.6e The Function of Consciousness




Baars, Bernard J. (1988). The functions of consciousness. In Bernard J. Baars (ed.), A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness. Cambridge University Press.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Banks, William P. (1996). How much work can a quale do? Consciousness and Cognition 5:368-80.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Barham, James (2003). Thoughts on thinking matter. Progress in Complexity, Information, and Design 2 (3).   (Google | More links) 










 
Bechtel, William P. & Richardson, Robert C. (1983). Consciousness and complexity: Evolutionary perspectives on the mind-body problem. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 61 (December):378-95.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 







 
Bering, Jesse M. (2004). Consciousness was a 'trouble-maker': On the general maladaptiveness of unsupported mental representation. Journal of Mind and Behavior 25 (1):33-56.   (Google) 
 
Bickhard, Mark H. (2001). The Emergence of Contentful Experience. In T. Kitamura (ed.), What Should Be Computed to Understand and Model Brain Function? World Scientific.   (Cited by 11 | Google | More links)
Abstract: There are many facets to mental life and mental experience. In this chapter, I attempt to account for some central characteristics among those facets. I argue that normative function and representation are emergent in particular forms of the self-maintenance of far from thermodynamic equilibrium systems in their essential far-from-equilibrium conditions. The nature of representation that is thereby modeled





 
Black, David M. (2001). Psychoanalysis and the function of consciousness. In Anthony Molino & Christine Ware (eds.), Where Id Was: Challenging Normalization in Psychoanalysis. Disseminations, Psychoanalysis in Contexts. Wesleyan University Press.   (Google) 
 
Block, Ned (ms). On a confusion about a function of consciousness.   (Cited by 567 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Consciousness is a mongrel concept: there are a number of very different "consciousnesses." Phenomenal consciousness is experience; the phenomenally conscious aspect of a state is what it is like to be in that state. The mark of access-consciousness, by contrast, is availability for use in reasoning and rationally guiding speech and action. These concepts are often partly or totally conflated, with bad results. This target article uses as an example a form of reasoning about a function of "consciousness" based on the phenomenon of blindsight. Some information about stimuli in the blind field is represented in the brains of blindsight patients, as shown by their correct "guesses," but they cannot harness this information in the service of action, and this is said to show that a function of phenomenal consciousness is somehow to enable information represented in the brain to guide action. But stimuli in the blind field are BOTH access-unconscious and phenomenally unconscious. The fallacy is: an obvious function of the machinery of access-consciousness is illicitly transferred to phenomenal consciousness












 
Block, Ned (1995). On a confusion about the function of consciousness. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 18:227--47.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Consciousness is a mongrel concept: there are a number of very different "consciousnesses." Phenomenal consciousness is experience; the phenomenally conscious aspect of a state is what it is like to be in that state. The mark of access-consciousness, by contrast, is availability for use in reasoning and rationally guiding speech and action. These concepts are often partly or totally conflated, with bad results. This target article uses as an example a form of reasoning about a function of "consciousness" based on the phenomenon of blindsight. Some information about stimuli in the blind field is represented in the brains of blindsight patients, as shown by their correct "guesses," but they cannot harness this information in the service of action, and this is said to show that a function of phenomenal consciousness is somehow to enable information represented in the brain to guide action. But stimuli in the blind field are BOTH access-unconscious and phenomenally unconscious. The fallacy is: an obvious function of the machinery of access-consciousness is illicitly transferred to phenomenal consciousness





 
Bogen, Joseph E. (2001). An experimental disconnection approach to a function of consciousness. International Journal of Neuroscience 111 (3):135-136.   (Google) 
 
Bolton, Thaddeus L. (1909). On the efficacy of consciousness. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 6 (16):421-432.   (Google | More links) 





 
Boodin, John E. (1908). Consciousness and reality. . Consciousness and its implications. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 5 (9):225-234.   (Google | More links) 





 
Bringsjord, Selmer & Noel, Ron (1998). Why did evolution engineer consciousness? In Gregory R. Mulhauser (ed.), Evolving Consciousness. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 





 
Cole, David J. (2002). The function of consciousness. In James H. Fetzer (ed.), Consciousness Evolving. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
DeLancey, Craig (1996). Emotion and the function of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (5-6):492-99.   (Cited by 8 | Google) 
 
Dretske, Fred (1997). What good is consciousness? Canadian Journal of Philosophy 27 (1):1-15.   (Cited by 11 | Google) 
 
Flanagan, Owen J. & Polger, Thomas W. (1998). Consciousness, adaptation, and epiphenomenalism. In James H. Fetzer (ed.), Consciousness Evolving. John Benjamins.   (Google) 
 
Flanagan, Owen J. & Polger, Thomas W. (1995). Zombies and the function of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 2 (4):313-21.   (Cited by 20 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Gomes, Gilberto (2005). Is consciousness epiphenomenal? Comment on Susan Pockett. Journal of Consciousness Studies 12 (12):77-79.   (Google) 
 
Gregory, Richard L. (1996). What do qualia do? Perception 25:377-79.   (Cited by 8 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 







 
Guzeldere, Guven; Flanagan, Owen J. & Hardcastle, Valerie Gray (2000). The nature and function of consciousness: Lessons from blindsight. In Michael S. Gazzaniga (ed.), The New Cognitive Neurosciences: 2nd Edition. MIT Press.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Hilbert, David R. (ms). Why have experiences?   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In _An Essay Towards a New Theory of Vision_ George Berkeley made the claim that,





 
Himma, Kenneth E. (2004). Moral biocentrism and the adaptive value of consciousness. Southern Journal of Philosophy 42 (1):25-44.   (Google) 
 
Hodgson, David (2002). Three tricks of consciousness: Qualia, chunking and selection. Journal of Consciousness Studies 9 (12):65-88.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: DAVID HODGSON Abstract: This article supports the proposition that, if a judgment about the aesthetic merits of an artistic object can take into account and thereby be influenced by the particular quality of the object, through gestalt experiences evoked by the object, then we have free will. It argues that it is probable that such a judgment can indeed take into account and be influenced by the particular quality of the object through gestalt experiences evoked by it, so as to make it probable that we do have free will. The proposition is supported by reference to two basic tricks apparently involved in conscious processes, which I call the qualia trick and the chunking trick; and it is suggested that these tricks make possible and indeed probable the existence of a third trick, which I call the selection trick





 
Humphrey, Nicholas (2000). The privatization of sensation. In Celia Heyes & Ludwig Huber (eds.), The Evolution of Cognition. MIT Press.   (Cited by 11 | Google | More links)
Abstract: It is the ambition of evolutionary psychology to explain how the basic features of human mental life came to be selected because of their contribution to biological survival. Counted among the most basic must be the subjective qualities of conscious sensory experience: the felt redness we experience on looking at a ripe tomato, the felt saltiness on tasting an anchovy, the felt pain on being pricked by a thorn. But, as many theorists acknowledge, with these qualia, the ambition of evolutionary psychology may have met its match. Everyone agrees that a trait can only contribute to an organism's biological survival in so far as it operates in the public domain. Yet almost everyone also agrees that the subjective quality of sensory experience is (at least for all practical purposes) private and without external influence. Then, maybe we must either concede that the subjective quality of sensations cannot after all have been determined by selection (even if this is theoretically depressing) or else demonstrate that the quality of sensations is not as private as it seems to be (even if this is intuitively unconvincing). No. I believe neither of these solutions to the puzzle is in fact the right one. I argue instead that the truth is that the quality of sensations has indeed been shaped by selection in the past, despite the fact that it is today effectively private. And this situation has come about as a result of a remarkable evolutionary progression, whereby the primitive activity of sensing slowly became "privatized" - that is to say, removed from the domain of overt public behavior and transformed into a mental activity that is now, in humans, largely if not exclusively internal to the subject's mind













 
Humphrey, Nicholas, The uses of consciousness.   (Cited by 15 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Reflexive consciousness evolved in the context of early human social life, as a means by which 'natural psychologists' could develop working models of their own and others' minds










 
Huss Parkhurst, Helen (1920). The obsolescence of consciousness. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 17 (22):596-606.   (Google | More links) 




 
James, William (1885). On the function of cognition. Mind 10 (37):27-44.   (Cited by 9 | Google | More links) 





 
Johnston, Mark (2006). Better than mere knowledge? The function of sensory awareness. In T.S. Gendler & John Hawthorne (eds.), Perceptual Experience. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links) 




 
Kim, Jaegwon (2007). The causal efficacy of consciousness. In Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Kirkpatrick, E. A. (1908). The part played by consciousness in mental operations. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 5 (16):421-429.   (Google | More links) 





 
Kraemer, Eric Russert (1984). Consciousness and the exclusivity of function. Mind 93 (April):271-5.   (Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Kriegel, Uriah (2004). The functional role of consciousness: A phenomenological approach. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 3 (2):171-93.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 








 
Lau, Hakwan, Volition and the function of consciousness.   (Google)
Abstract: What are the psychological functions that could only be performed consciously? People have intuitively assumed that many acts of volition are not influenced by unconscious information. These acts range from simple examples such as making a spontaneous motor movement, to higher cognitive control. However, the available evidence suggests that under suitable conditions, unconscious information can influence these behaviors and the underlying neural mechanisms. One possibility is that stimuli that are consciously perceived tend to yield strong signals in the brain, which makes us think that consciousness has the function of such strong signals. However, if we could create conditions where the stimuli could yield strong signals but not the conscious experience of perception, perhaps we would find that such stimuli are just as effective in influencing volitional behavior. Future studies that focus on clarifying this issue may tell us what the defining functions of consciousness are
 
Lehar, Steven (online). The function of conscious experience: An analogical paradigm of perception and behavior.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The question of whether conscious experience has any functional purpose depends on a more fundamental issue concerning the nature of conscious experience. In particular, whether the world of experience is the external world itself, as suggested by direct realism, or whether it is merely a virtual- reality replica of that world in an internal representation, as in indirect realism, or representationalism. There is an epistemological problem with the notion of direct realism, for we cannot be consciously aware of objects beyond the sensory surface. Therefore the world of experience can only be an internal replica of the external world. This in turn validates a phenomenological approach to studying the nature of the perceptual representation in the brain. Phenomenology reveals that the representational strategy employed in the brain is an analogical one, in which objects are represented in the brain by constructing full spatial replicas of those objects in an internal representation






 
Levy, Neil (online). Are zombies responsible? The role of consciousness in moral responsibility.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Compatibilists often think they can afford to be complacent with regard to scientific findings. But there are apparent threats to free will besides determinism. Robert Kane has recently claimed that if consciousness does not initiate action, all accounts of free will go down, compatibilist and incompatibilist. Some cognitive scientists argue that in fact consciousness does not initiate action. In this paper I argue that they are right (though not for the reasons they advance): as a matter of fact consciousness does not initiate action. But, I contend, Kane is wrong in thinking that it follows that we have no free will. I sketch how we might have free will in spite of the finding that consciousness does not initiate action, and remark on the implications for several well-known accounts of responsibility, include Clarke's agent-causal theory and Fischer and Ravizza's reasons-responsiveness account





 
Levy, Neil (2008). Restoring control: Comments on George Sher. Philosophia 36 (2).   (Google)
Abstract: In a recent article, George Sher argues that a realistic conception of human agency, which recognizes the limited extent to which we are conscious of what we do, makes the task of specifying a conception of the kind of control that underwrites ascriptions of moral responsibility much more difficult than is commonly appreciated. Sher suggests that an adequate account of control will not require that agents be conscious of their actions; we are responsible for what we do, in the absence of consciousness, so long as our obliviousness is explained by some subset of the mental states constitutive of the agent. In this response, I argue that Sher is wrong on every count. First, the account of moral responsibility in the absence of consciousness he advocates does not preserve control at all; rather, it ought to be seen as a variety of attributionism (a kind of account of moral responsibility which holds that control is unnecessary for responsibility, so long as the action is reflective of the agent’s real self). Second, I argue that a realistic conception of agency, that recognizes the limited role that consciousness plays in human life, narrows the scope of moral responsibility. We exercise control over our actions only when consciousness has played a direct or indirect role in their production. Moreover, we cannot escape this conclusion by swapping a volitionist account of moral responsibility for an attributionist account: our actions are deeply reflective of our real selves only when consciousness has played a causal role in their production
 
Libet, Benjamin W. (2003). Can conscious experience affect brain activity? Journal of Consciousness Studies 10 (12):24-28.   (Cited by 10 | Google | More links) 




 
Mackie, J. L. (1981). The efficacy of consciousness: Comments on Honderich's paper. Inquiry 24 (October):343-352.   (Google) 
 
McGinn, Colin (1981). A note on functionalism and function. Philosophical Topics 12 (1):169-70.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google)




  
Menant, Christophe (ms). Performances of self-awareness used to explain the evolutionary advantages of consciousness (2004).   (Google)
Abstract: The question about evolution of consciousness has been addressed so far as possible selectional advantage related to consciousness ("What evolutionary advantages, if any, being conscious might confer on an organism ? "). But evidencing an adaptative explanation of consciousness has proven to be very difficult. Reason for that being the complexity of consciousness. We take here a different approach on subject by looking at possible selectional advantages related to the performance of Self Awareness that appeared during evolution millions of years before consciousness as we know it for humans. The interest of such an approach is that the analysis of selectional advantage is done at an evolution step sigificantly simpler that the step of Human Consciousness. We analyse how evolutionary advantages have resulted from this specific Self Awareness step. This is done by taking into consideration the possibility for a subject to identify with a conspecific at this level of evolution. We use the results made available by Mirror Neuron researchs where intersubjectivity and some level of identification with conspecifics have been evidenced for non human primates. Selectional advantages related to Self Awareness are analysed two ways: - Reformulating the performances of imitation and of development of language. - Showing that Self Awareness within group life can naturaly produce an important increase in fear/anxiety for a subject, and that the means implemented by the subject to overcome this fear/anxiety can act as significant evolution advantages opening the road to Human Consciousness. Such approach brings new elements supporting the view that consciousness is grounded in emotions. It also proposes some more evolutionist explanations to the widely dicussed subject of Empathy (S. Preston & F. de Waal) in terms of specific behaviour implemented to limit fear/anxiety increase. This approach also provides some explanation for limited anxiety within dolphins and introduces a basis for a possible phylogenesis of emotions
 
Moore, A. W. (1906). The function of thought. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 3 (19):519-522.   (Google | More links) 





 
Morsella, Ezequiel; Krieger, Stephen C. & Bargh, John A. (2009). The primary function of consciousness: Why skeletal muscles are voluntary muscles. In Ezequiel Morsella, John A. Bargh & Peter M. Gollwitzer (eds.), Oxford Handbook of Human Action. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Mott, Peter (1982). On the function of consciousness. Mind 91 (July):423-9.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Oatley, Keith (1988). On changing one's mind: A possible function of consciousness. In Anthony J. Marcel & E. Bisiach (eds.), Consciousness in Contemporary Science. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
O'Regan, Kevin J.; Myin, Erik & No,  (2001). Toward an Analytic Phenomenology: The Concepts of "Bodiliness" and "Grabbiness". In A. Carsetti (ed.), Seeing and Thinking. Reflections on Kanizsa's Studies in Visual Cognition. Kluwer.   (Cited by 30 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper, we present an account of phenomenal con- sciousness. Phenomenal consciousness is experience, and the _problem _of phenomenal consciousness is to explain how physical processes






 
Pauen, Michael (2006). Feeling causes. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (1-2):129-152.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: According to qualia-epiphenomenalism, phenomenal properties are causally inefficacious, they are metaphysically distinct from, and nomologically connected with certain physical properties. The present paper argues that the claim of causal inefficacy undermines any effort to establish the alleged nomological connection. Epiphenomenalists concede that variations of phenomenal properties in the absence of any variation of physical/functional properties are logically possible, however they deny that these variations are nomologically possible. But if such variations have neither causal nor functional consequences, there is no way to detect themanot only in scientific experiments, but also from the first-person perspective. Since neither third- nor first- person evidence can rule out the actual occurrence of such dissociations, the alleged nomological connection between phenomenal and physical properties cannot be established, in principle. As a consequence, the distinction between logical and nomological possibility breaks down and it cannot be ruled out that such dissociations occur in an unlimited number of cases





 
Perlis, Donald R. (1997). Consciousness as self-function. Journal of Consciousness Studies 4 (4-5):509-25.   (Cited by 15 | Google) 
 
Pierson, Lee & Trout, Monroe (ms). What is consciousness for?   (Google | More links)
Abstract: What is Consciousness For? Lee Pierson and Monroe Trout Copyright © 2005 Abstract: The answer to the title question is, in a word, volition. Our hypothesis is that the ultimate adaptive function of consciousness is to make volitional movement possible. All conscious processes exist to subserve that ultimate function. Thus, we believe that all conscious organisms possess at least some volitional capability. Consciousness makes volitional attention possible; volitional attention, in turn, makes volitional movement possible. There is, as far as we know, no valid theoretical argument that consciousness is needed for any function other than volitional movement and no convincing empirical evidence that consciousness performs any other ultimate function. Consciousness, via volitional action, increases the likelihood that an organism will direct its attention, and ultimately its movements, to whatever is most important for its survival and reproduction






 
Place, Ullin T. (2000). The causal potency of qualia: Its nature and its source. Brain and Mind 1 (2):183-192.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: There is an argument (Medlin, 1967; Place, 1988) whichshows conclusively that if qualia are causallyimpotent we could have no possible grounds forbelieving that they exist. But if, as this argumentshows, qualia are causally potent with respect to thedescriptions we give of them, it is tolerably certainthat they are causally potent in other morebiologically significant respects. The empiricalevidence, from studies of the effect of lesions of thestriate cortex (Humphrey, 1974; Weiskrantz, 1986;Cowey and Stoerig, 1995) shows that what is missing inthe absence of visual qualia is the ability tocategorize sensory inputs in the visual modality. This would suggest that the function of privateexperience is to supply what Broadbent (1971) callsthe evidence on which the categorization ofproblematic sensory inputs are based. At the sametime analysis of the causal relation shows that whatdifferentiates a causal relation from an accidentalspatio-temporal conjunction is the existence ofreciprocally related dispositional properties of theentities involved which combine to make it true thatif one member of the conjunction, the cause, had notexisted, the other, the effect, would not haveexisted. The possibility that qualia might bedispositional properties of experiences which, as itwere, supply the invisible glue that sticks cause toeffect in this case is examined, but finallyrejected





 
Polger, Thomas W. & Flanagan, Owen J. (online). Explaining the evolution of consciousness: The other hard problem.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Recently some philosophers interested in consciousness have begun to turn their attention to the question of what evolutionary advantages, if any, being conscious might confer on an organism. The issue has been pressed in recent dicussions involving David Chalmers, Todd Moody, Owen Flanagan and Thomas Polger, Daniel Dennett, and others. The purpose of this essay is to consider some of the problems that face anyone who wants to give an evolutionary explanation of consciousness. We begin by framing the problem in the context of some current debates. Then we







 
Polger, Thomas W. (1995). Zombies and the function of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 2 (4):313-321.   (Google | More links) 




 
Popper, Karl R. (1978). Natural selection and the emergence of mind. Dialectica 32:339-55.   (Cited by 66 | Google | More links) 




 
Ramachandran, Vilayanur S. & Hirstein, William (1998). Three laws of qualia: What neurology tells us about the biological functions of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 4 (4-5):429-57.   (Cited by 40 | Google | More links) 





 
Rosenthal, David (online). Consciousness and its function.   (Google)
Abstract: MS, under submission, derived from a Powerpoint presentation at a Conference on Consciousness, Memory, and Perception, in honor of Larry Weiskrantz, City University, London, September 15, 2006
 
Rosenthal, David (online). The function and facilitation of consciousness.   (Google) 
 
Shaw, Robert & Kinsella-Shaw, Jeffrey (2007). The survival value of informed awareness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 14 (1):137-154.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: Various hypotheses about the importance of psycho-neural concomitants are reviewed and their implications discussed for the 'easy' and 'hard' problems of consciousness -- especially, as viewed by cognitive and ecological psychology. In Ecological Psychology, where the subjective-objective dichotomy is repudiated, these concepts are without foundation, and are replaced by informed awareness, which is argued to play an important, perhaps, indispensable role in goal- directed actions and thus to have survival value. The significance of informed awareness is illustrated in several real- world goal-directed tasks
 
Shanon, Benny (1998). What is the function of consciousness? Journal of Consciousness Studies 5:295-308.   (Cited by 10 | Google) 
 
Tye, Michael (1996). The function of consciousness. Noûs 30 (3):287-305.   (Cited by 10 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
van Gulick, Robert (1994). Deficit studies and the function of phenomenal consciousness. In George Graham & G. Lynn Stephens (eds.), Philosophical Psychopathology. MIT Press.   (Cited by 9 | Google) 
 
van Gulick, Robert (1989). What difference does consciousness make? Philosophical Topics 17 (1):211-30.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Velmans, Max (1991). Is human information processing conscious? [Journal (Paginated)] 14 (4):651-69.   (Cited by 162 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: Investigations of the function of consciousness in human information processing have focused mainly on two questions: (1) where does consciousness enter into the information processing sequence and (2) how does conscious processing differ from preconscious and unconscious processing. Input analysis is thought to be initially "preconscious," "pre-attentive," fast, involuntary, and automatic. This is followed by "conscious," "focal-attentive" analysis which is relatively slow, voluntary, and flexible. It is thought that simple, familiar stimuli can be identified preconsciously, but conscious processing is needed to identify complex, novel stimuli. Conscious processing has also been thought to be necessary for choice, learning and memory, and the organization of complex, novel responses, particularly those requiring planning, reflection, or creativity










 
1.6f Temporal Consciousness




Akeley, L. E. (1925). The problem of the specious present and physical time: The problem generalized. Journal of Philosophy 22 (21):561-573.   (Google | More links) 




 
Alves, Pedro M. S. (2008). Objective time and the experience of time: Husserl's theory of time in light of some theses of A. Einstein's special theory of relativity. Husserl Studies 24 (3).   (Google)
Abstract: In this paper, I start with the opposition between the Husserlian project of a phenomenology of the experience of time, started in 1905, and the mathematical and physical theory of time as it comes out of Einstein’s special theory of relativity in the same year. Although the contrast between the two approaches is apparent, my aim is to show that the original program of Husserl’s time theory is the constitution of an objective time and a time of the world, starting from the intuitive giveness of time, i.e., from time as it appears. To show this, I stress the structural similarity between Husserl’s original question of time and the problem of a phenomenology of space constitution as it was first developed in the his manuscripts from the nineteenth century, in which we find the threefold question of the origin of our representation of space, of the geometrization of intuitive space, and of the constitution of transcendent world space. Finally, I reconsider some of Husserl’s main theses about the phenomenological constitution of objective time in light of the main results of special relativity time-theory, introducing several corrections to central assumptions that underlie Husserl’s theory of time
 
Andersen, Holly & Grush, Rick (forthcoming). A brief history of time consciousness: Historical precursors to James and Husserl. Journal of the History of Philosophy.   (Google) 
 
Antony, Michael V. (2001). On the temporal boundaries of simple experiences. Journal of Mind and Behavior 22 (3):263-286.   (Cited by 1 | Google)
Abstract: I argue that the temporal boundaries of certain experiences
 
Bardon, Adrian (2007). Empiricism, Time-Awareness, and Hume's Manners of Disposition. Journal of Scottish Philosophy 5.   (Google)
Abstract: The issue of time-awareness presents a critical challenge for empiricism: if temporal properties are not directly perceived, how do we become aware of them? Struggles with this problem have cast doubt on empiricism as an adequate account of the origin of our ideas; Kant builds his theory of a priori knowledge on empiricism’s shortcomings with regard to time-awareness. In the first section of this paper I outline the problem of time-awareness for empiricism, along with some recent attempts to answer it. In the second section I explain how a unique empiricist account of time-awareness suggested by Hume’s comments on time in the Treatise avoids the problems characteristic of other attempts. In the third section I discuss some counter-intuitive consequences of this Humean theory. In the final section I introduce and then dismiss one possible defense of the Humean approach based on his rejection of a universal timeline. I conclude that the failure of empiricists to come up with a defensible theory of time-awareness lends prima facie support to a non-empiricist theory of ideas.
 
Bennett, Jonathan (2004). Time in human experience. Philosophy 79 (308):165-183.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: A set of eight mini-discourses. 1. The conceivability of the physical world's running in the opposite temporal direction. 2. Augustine's reason for thinking this is not conceivable for the world of the mind. 3. Trying to imagine being a creature that lives atemporally. 4. Memory's need for causal input. 5. Acting in the knowledge that how one acts is strictly determined. 6. The Newcomb problem. 7. The idea that all voluntary action is intended to be remedial. 8. Haunted by the strangeness of the idea of the past qua past







 
Bergmann, Gustav (1960). Duration and the specious present. Philosophy of Science 27 (January):39-47.   (Google | More links) 






 
Bergson, Henri (1913). Time and Free Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness. Dover Publications.   (Google)
Abstract: Bergson argues for free will by showing that the arguments against it come from a confusion of different conceptions of time. As opposed to physicists' idea of measurable time, in human experience life is perceived as a continuous and unmeasurable flow rather than as a succession of marked-off states of consciousness--something that can be measured not quantitatively, but only qualitatively. His conclusion is that free will is an observable fact
 
Bond, E. J. (2005). Does the subject of experience exist in the world? Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 71 (1):124-133.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper I attempt to show, by considering a number of sources, including Wittgenstein, Sartre, Thomas Nagel and Spinoza, but also adding something crucial of my own, that it is impossible to construe the subject of experience as an object among other objects in the world. My own added argument is the following. The subject of experience cannot move in time along with material events and processes or it could not be aware of the passage of time, hence neither of change nor of motion. The subject cannot therefore be identified with any neural process, function, or location since whatever goes on in the CNS is necessarily objective and part of the temporal flux. However this does not imply any form of dualism for experiences exist only for the subject whose experiences they are and hence they have no objective reality






 
Bradley McGilvary, Evander (1914). Time and the experience of time. Philosophical Review 23 (2):121-145.   (Google | More links) 




 
Brown, J. (2000). Mind and Nature: Essays on Time and Subjectivity. Whurr Publishers.   (Cited by 19 | Google) 
 
Bruzina, Ronald (2000). There is more to the phenomenology of time than meets the eye. In John B. Brough (ed.), The Many Faces of Time. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Pub.   (Google) 
 
Burton, Robert G. (1976). The human awareness of time: An analysis. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 36 (March):303-318.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Butterfield, Jeremy (1998). Seeing the present. In Questions of Time and Tense. Oxford: Clarendon Press.   (Cited by 14 | Google | More links) 






 
Chari, C. T. K. (1951). Some metaphysical questions about the doctrine of the 'specious present'. Philosophical Quarterly (India) 23 (October):129-138.   (Google) 
 
Cobb-Stevens, Richard M. (1998). James and Husserl: Time-consciousness and the intentionality of presence and absence. In Dan Zahavi (ed.), Self-Awareness, Temporality, and Alterity. Dordrecht: Kluwer.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Cohen, Jonathan (1954). The experience of time. Acta Psychologica 10:207-19.   (Google) 
 
Dainton, Barry F. (2004). Precis of Stream of Consciousness. Psyche 10 (1).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: That our ordinary everyday experience exhibits both unity and continuity is uncontroversial, and on the face of it utterly unmysterious. At any moment we have some conscious awareness of both the world about us, as revealed through our perceptual experiences, and our own inner states





 
Dainton, Barry (2008). Sensing change. Philosophical Issues 18 (1):362-384.   (Google) 
 
Dainton, Barry F. (2000). Stream of Consciousness: Unity and Continuity in Conscious Experience. Routledge.   (Cited by 33 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Stream of Consciousness is about the phenomenology of conscious experience. Barry Dainton shows us that stream of consciousness is not a mosaic of discrete fragments of experience, but rather an interconnected flowing whole. Through a deep probing into the nature of awareness, introspection, phenomenal space and time consciousness, Dainton offers a truly original understanding of the nature of consciousness







 
Dainton, Barry (2008). The experience of time and change. Philosophy Compass 3 (4):619-638.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Can we directly experience change? Although some philosophers have denied it, the phenomenological evidence is unambiguous: we can, and do. But how is this possible? What structures or features of consciousness render such experience possible? A variety of very different answers to this question have been proposed, answers which have very different implications for the nature of consciousness itself. In this brief survey no attempt is made to engage with the often complex (and sometimes obscure) literature on this topic. Instead, a largely schematic examination of the main options is conducted, with a view to determining the most promising avenues for further investigation





 
Dainton, Barry F. (2003). Time in experience: Reply to Gallagher. Psyche 9 (12).   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Consciousness exists in time, but time is also to be found within consciousness: we are directly aware of both persistence and change, at least over short intervals. On reflection this can seem baffling. How is it possible for us to be immediately aware of phenomena which are not (strictly speaking) present? What must consciousness be like for this to be possible? In _Stream of Consciousness_ I argued that influential accounts of phenomenal temporality along the lines developed by Broad and Husserl were fundamentally flawed, and proposed a quite different account: the overlap model. While recognizing that the latter has merits, Gallagher argues that it too is fundamentally flawed; he also takes issue with some of my claims concerning Broad and Husserl. My reply comes in three main parts. I start by clarifying my use of certain terms, in particular _realism_ and _anti-realism_ as applied to theories of phenomenal temporality in general, and the accounts of Broad and Husserl in particular. I then turn to Gallagher






 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1992). Temporal Anomalies of Consciousness. In Y. Christen & P.S. Churchland (eds.), Neurophilosophy and Alzheimer's Disease. Springer-Verlag.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: As cognitive science, including especially cognitive neuroscience, closes in on the first realistic models of the human mind, philosophical puzzles and problems that have been conveniently postponed or ignored for generations are beginning to haunt the efforts of the scientists, confounding their vision and leading them down hopeless paths of theory. I will illustrate this claim with a brief look at several temporal phenomena which appear anomalous only because of a cognitive illusion: an illusion about the point of view of the observerix. Since there is no point in the brain where "it all comes together," several compelling oversimplifications of traditional theorizing must be abandoned









 
Dennett, Daniel C. & Kinsbourne, Marcel (1992). Time and the observer: The where and when of consciousness in the brain. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 15:183-201.   (Cited by 394 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: _Behavioral and Brain Sciences_ , 15, 183-247, 1992. Reprinted in _The Philosopher's Annual_ , Grim, Mar and Williams, eds., vol. XV-1992, 1994, pp. 23-68; Noel Sheehy and Tony Chapman, eds., _Cognitive Science_ , Vol. I, Elgar, 1995, pp.210-274







































 
Dobbs, H. A. C. (1951). The relation between the time of psychology and the time of physics part I. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 2 (6):122-141.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 








 
Dooley, Patrick K. (2006). William James's "specious present" and Willa cather's phenomenology of memory. Philosophy Today 50 (5):444-449.   (Google) 
 
Dunlap, Knight (1911). Rhythm and the specious present. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 8 (13):348-354.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 





 
Eames, Elizabeth R. (1986). Russell and the experience of time. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 46 (June):681-682.   (Google | More links) 





 
Ewer, Bernard C. (1909). The time paradox in perception. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 6 (6):145-149.   (Google | More links) 





 
Falk, Arthur E. (2003). Perceiving temporal passage. In Amita Chatterjee (ed.), Perspectives on Consciousness. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.   (Google) 
 
Farrell, B. A. (1973). Temporal precedence. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 73:193-216.   (Google) 
 
Ferrari, Donald & Ferrari, Melanie (eds.) (2001). Consciousness in Time. Heidelberg: C Winter University Verlag.   (Google) 
 
Findlay, J. N. (1956). Report on does it make sense to suppose that all events, including personal experiences, could occur in reverse? Analysis 16 (June):121.   (Google) 
 
Franck, Georg (2004). Mental presence and the temporal present. In Gordon G. Globus, Karl H. Pribram & Giuseppe Vitiello (eds.), Brain and Being: At the Boundary Between Science, Philosophy, Language and Arts. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Gale, Richard M. (1997). From the specious to the suspicious present: The jack Horner phenomenology of William James. Journal of Speculative Philosophy 11 (3):163-189.   (Google) 
 
Gallagher, Shaun (2003). Sync-ing in the stream of experience sync-ing in the stream of experience: Time-consciousness in broad, Husserl, and Dainton. Psyche 9 (10).   (Google) 
 
Gallagher, Shaun (2003). Sync-ing in the stream of experience. Psyche 9 (10).   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: about the specious present and time consciousness in both the Jamesian and the phenomenological traditions, I raise critical objections to his overlap model. Dainton's interpretations of Broad and Husserl are both insightful and problematic. In addition, there are unresolved problems in Dainton's own analysis of conscious experience. These problems involve ongoing content, lingering content, and a lack of phenomenological clarity concerning the central concept of overlapping experiences






 
Gallagher, Shaun (1979). Suggestions towards a revision of Husserl's phenomenology of time-consciousness. Man and World 12:445-464.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Gallagher, Shaun (1998). The Inordinance of Time. Northwestern University Press.   (Google) 
 
Greene, David B. (1984). Mahler: Consciousness And Temporality. Gordon & Breach.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Gregg, John R. (online). Time consciousness and the specious present.   (Google)
Abstract: Roger Penrose, in _The Emperor's New Mind_ (1989), writes about the way Mozart perceived music. Mozart did not play a piece in his mind in real time, or even speeded up, but could hold it before him all at once. We all do this, although usually for much shorter riffs than entire symphonies. I have argued that the all-at-onceness of our thoughts and perceptions is at least as inexplicable as what it is like to see red; I think the aural/temporal all-at-onceness makes the point at least as vividly as the visual/spatial all-at-onceness of the curl of smoke in an art nouveau poster
 
Grush, Holly K. Andersen Rick (2009). A brief history of time-consciousness: Historical precursors to James and Husserl. Journal of the History of Philosophy 47 (2):pp. 277-307.   (Google)
Abstract: William James' Principles of Psychology , in which he made famous the "specious present" doctrine of temporal experience, and Edmund Husserl's Zur Phänomenologie des inneren Zeitbewusstseins were giant strides in the philosophical investigation of the temporality of experience. However, an important set of precursors to these works has not been adequately investigated. In this article, we undertake this investigation. Beginning with Reid's essay "Memory" in Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man , we trace out a line of development of ideas about the temporality of experience that runs through Dugald Stewart, Thomas Brown, William Hamilton, and finally the work of Shadworth Hodgson and Robert Kelly, both of whom were immediate influences on James (though James pseudonymously cites the latter as 'E.R. Clay'). Furthermore, we argue that Hodgson, especially his Metaphysic of Experience (1898), was a significant influence on Husserl
 
Grush, Rick (2005). Brain time and phenomenological time. In A. Brooks & Kathleen Akins (eds.), Philosophy and the Neurosciences. Cambridge.   (Cited by 3 | Google)
Abstract: ... there are cases in which on the basis of a temporally extended content of consciousness a unitary apprehension takes place which is spread out over a temporal interval (the so-called specious present). ... That several successive tones yield a melody is possible only in this way, that the succession of psychical processes are united "forthwith" in a common structure
 
Grush, Rick (2006). How to, and how not to, bridge computational cognitive neuroscience and Husserlian phenomenology of time consciousness. Synthese 153 (3):417-450.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: A number of recent attempts to bridge Husserlian phenomenology of time consciousness and contemporary tools and results from cognitive science or computational neuroscience are described and critiqued. An alternate proposal is outlined that lacks the weaknesses of existing accounts







 
Hameroff, Stuart R. (online). Time, consciousness, and quantum events in fundamental space-time geometry.   (Google)
Abstract: 1. Introduction: The problems of time and consciousness What is time? St. Augustine remarked that when no one asked him, he knew what time was; however when someone asked him, he did not. Is time a process which flows? Is time a dimension in which processes occur? Does time actually exist? The notion that time is a process which "flows" directionally may be illusory (the "myth of passage") for if time did flow it would do so in some medium or vessel (e.g. minutes per what?) [1]. But if time is a dimension in which processes occurred, e.g. as one component of a 4 dimensional spacetime, then why would processes occur unidirectionally in time? Yet we perceive time as an orderly, unidirectional process. An alternative explanation is that time does not exist as either a process or dimension, but that reality is a collage of discrete, disconnected and haphazardly arranged configurations of the universe, e.g. as described in Julian Barbour's "The end of time" [2]. In this view our perception of a unidirectional flow of time occurs because each moment, or "Now" as Barbour terms them, involves memory of other conceptually relevant moments, and the orderly flow of time is an illusion. Barbour's deconstruction of time contrasts the Newtonian reality of objects moving deterministically through 4 dimensional spacetime. Newton's contemporary (and rival) Leibniz [3] viewed the world in a manner consistent with Barbour (and with Mach's principle that the spatiotemporal structure of the universe is dependent on the distribution of mass, a foundation of Einstein's general relativity). According to Leibniz the world is to be understood not as matter/mass moving in a framework of space and time, but of more fundamental snapshot-like entities that momentarily fuse space and matter into single possible arrangements or configurations of the entire universe. Such configurations, which can be fabulously rich and complex considering the vastness of the universe, are the ultimate "things" of reality, which Leibniz termed "monads"..
 
Hicks, R. E.; Miller, George W.; Gaes, G. & Bierman, K. (1977). Concurrent processing demands and the experience of time-in-passing. American Journal of Psychology 90:431-46.   (Cited by 33 | Google) 
 
Hodson, Shadworth H. (1900). Perception of change and duration-a reply. Mind 9 (34):240-243.   (Google | More links) 





 
Hoerl, Christoph (2008). On being stuck in time. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 7 (4):485-500.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: It is sometimes claimed that non-human animals (and perhaps also young children) live their lives entirely in the present and are cognitively ‘stuck in time’. Adult humans, by contrast, are said to be able to engage in ‘mental time travel’. One possible way of making sense of this distinction is in terms of the idea that animals and young children cannot engage in tensed thought, which might seem a preposterous idea in the light of certain findings in comparative and developmental psychology. I try to make this idea less preposterous by looking into some of the cognitive requirements for tensed thought. In particular, I suggest that tensed thought requires a specific form of causal understanding, which animals and young children may not possess.





 
Hoerl, Christoph & McCormack, Teresa (2001). Perspectives on time and memory: an introduction. In Christoph Hoerl & Teresa McCormack (eds.), Time and memory: Issues in Philosophy and Psychology. Oxford University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: What is the connection between the way we represent time and things in time, on the one hand, and our capacity to remember particular past events, on the other? This is the substantive question that has stood behind the project of putting together this volume. The methodological assumption that has informed this project is that any progress with the difficult and fascinating set of issues that are raised by this question must draw on the resources of various areas both in philos- ophy and in psychology
 
Hoerl, Christoph (2009). Time and Tense in Perceptual Experience. Philosophers' Imprint 9 (12):1-18.   (Google)
Abstract: We can not just see, hear or feel how things are at a time, but we also have perceptual experiences as of things moving or changing. I argue that such temporal experiences have a content that is tenseless, i.e. best characterized in terms of notions such as 'before' and 'after' (rather than, say, 'past', 'present' and 'future'), and that such experiences are essentially of the nature of a process that takes up time, viz., the same time as the process that is being experienced. Both claims have been made before, though usually separately from each other, and I don't believe the connection between them has been sufficiently recognized.
 
Hoerl, Christoph (1998). The perception of time and the notion of a point of view. European Journal of Philosophy 5 (2):156-171.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper aims to investigate the temporal content of perceptual experience. It argues that we must recognize the existence of temporal perceptions, i.e., perceptions the content of which cannot be spelled out simply by looking at what is the case at an isolated instant. Acts of apprehension can cover a succession of events. However, a subject who has such perceptions can fall short of having a concept of time. Similar arguments have been put forward to show that a subject who has spatial perceptions can fall short of having a concept of space. In both cases, it is the fact that perception is from a point of view which stands in the way of it constituting an exercise of a concept of how things are objectively. However, the paper also shows that the way in which perception is perspectival takes a different form in each of the two cases.







 
Hoy, Ronald C. (1976). A note on Gustav Bergmann's treatment of temporal consciousness. Philosophy of Science 43 (4):610-617.   (Google | More links) 




 
Hoy, Ronald C. (1976). Science and temporal experience: A critical defense. Philosophy Research Archives 1156.   (Google) 
 
Husserl, Edmund G. (1991). On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time (1893-1917). Translated by John Barnett Brough. Dordrecht: Kluwer.   (Cited by 33 | Google | More links) 





 
Hutt, Curtis M. (1999). Husserl: Perception and the ideality of time. Philosophy Today 43 (4):370-385.   (Google) 
 
Ismael, Jenann (ms). Memory and temporal phenomenology.   (Google) 
 
Iyer, Vijay (2004). Improvisation, temporality and embodied experience. Journal of Consciousness Studies 11 (3-4):159-173.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Johnson, David Martel (1974). The temporal dimension of perceptual experience: A non-traditional empiricism. American Philosophical Quarterly 11 (January):71-76.   (Google) 
 
Kates, Carol A. (1970). Perception and temporality in Husserl's phenomenology. Philosophy Today 14:89-100.   (Google) 
 
Kelly, Sean D. (forthcoming). On time and truth. In Kurt J. Pritzl (ed.), Studies in Philosophy and the History of Philosophy. Catholic University of America Press.   (Google) 
 
Kelly, Sean D. (2005). Temporal awareness. In David Woodruff Smith & Amie L. Thomasson (eds.), Phenomenology and Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Clarendon Press.   (Google) 
 
Kelly, Sean D. (forthcoming). Time and experience. In A. Brooks & Kathleen Akins (eds.), Philosophy and the Neurosciences. Cambridge.   (Google) 
 
Kelly, Sean D. (2005). The puzzle of temporal experience. In Andrew Brook (ed.), Cognition and the Brain: The Philosophy and Neuroscience Movement. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links)
Abstract: There you are at the opera house. The soprano has just hit her high note – a glassshattering high C that fills the hall – and she holds it. She holds it. She holds it. She holds it. She holds it. She holds the note for such a long time that after a while a funny thing happens: you no longer seem only to hear it, the note as it is currently sounding, that glass-shattering high C that is loud and high and pure. In addition, you also seem to hear something more. It is difficult to express precisely what this extra feature is. One is tempted to say, however, that the note now sounds like it has been going on for a very long time. Perhaps it even sounds like a note that has been going on for too long. In any event, what you hear no longer seems to be limited to the pitch, timbre, loudness, and other strictly audible qualities of the note. You seem in addition to experience, even to hear, something about its temporal extent







 
Kriegel, Uriah (2009). Temporally token-reflexive experiences. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 39 (4):585-617.   (Google)
Abstract: John Searle has argued that all perceptual experiences are token-reflexive, in the sense that they are constituents of their own veridicality conditions. Many philosophers have found the kind of token-reflexivity he attributes to experiences, which I will call _causal_ token-reflexivity, unfaithful to perceptual phenomenology. In this paper, I develop an argument for a different sort of token-reflexivity in perceptual (as well as some non- perceptual) experiences, which I will call _temporal_ token-reflexivity, and which ought to be phenomenologically unobjectionable
 
Lafleur, Laurence J. (1942). The specious present. Personalist 23:407-415.   (Google) 
 
Larrabee, M. J. (1993). Inside time-consciousness: Diagramming the flux. Husserl Studies 10 (3).   (Google) 
 
Larrabee, Mary J. (1989). Time and spatial models: Temporality in Husserl. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 49 (March):373-392.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
le Poidevin, Robin (2004). A puzzle concerning time perception. Synthese 142 (1):109-142.   (Google) 
 
Le Poidevin, Robin (online). The experience and perception of time. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.   (Google) 
 
Le Poidevin, Robin (2007). The Images of Time: An Essay on Temporal Representation. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Loveday, T. (1900). Perception of change and duration-some additional notes. Mind 9 (35):384-388.   (Google | More links) 





 
Rapoport, Diego L. (2009). surmounting the cartesian cut with philosophy, physics, cybernetics and geometry; self.reference, torsion, the klein bottle, multivalued logics and quantum mechanics. foundations of physics 39 (09).   (Google)
Abstract: In this transdisciplinary article which stems from philosophical considerations (that depart from phenomenology -after Merleau-Ponty, Heidegger and Rosen- and Hegelian dialectics), we develop a conception based on topological (the Moebius surface and the Klein bottle) and geometrical considerations (based on torsion and non-orientability of manifolds), and multivalued logics which we develop into a unified world conception that surmounts the Cartesian cut and Aristotelian logic. The role of torsion appears in a self-referential construction of space and time, which will be further related to the commutator of the True and False operators of matrix logic, still with a quantum superposed state related to a Moebius surface, and as the physical field at the basis of Spencer-Brown’s primitive distinction in the protologic of the calculus of distinction. In this setting, paradox, self-reference, depth, time and space, higher-order non-dual logic, perception, spin and a time operator, the Klein bottle, hypernumbers due to Mus`es which include non-trivial square roots of ±1 and in particular non-trivial nilpotents, quantum field operators, the transformation of cognition to spin for two-state quantum systems, are found to be keenly interwoven in a world conception compatible with the philosophical approach taken for basis of this article. The Klein bottle is found not only to be the topological in-formation for self-reference and paradox whose logical counterpart in the calculus of indications are the paradoxical imaginary time waves, but also a classicalquantum transformer (Hadamard’s gate in quantum computation) which is indispensable to be able to obtain a complete multivalued logical system, and still to generate the matrix extension of classical connective Boolean logic. We further find that the multivalued logic that stems from considering the paradoxical equation in the calculus of distinctions, and in particular, the imaginary solutions to this equation, generates the matrix logic which supersedes the classical logic of connectives and which has for particular subtheories fuzzy and quantum logics. Thus, from a primitive distinction in the vacuum plane and the axioms of the calculus of distinction, we can derive by incorporating paradox, the world conception succintly described above.
 
Mabbott, J. D. (1951). Our direct experience of time. Mind 60 (April):153-167.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links) 






 
Mabbott, J. D. (1955). The specious present. Mind 64 (July):376-383.   (Google | More links) 






 
Martin, J. L. (1973). The duality of the present. Man and World 6 (September):293-301.   (Google) 
 
Mazis, Glen (1992). Merleau-Ponty and the Backward Flow of Time: The Reversibility of Temporality and the Temporality of Reversibility. In Shaun Gallagher Thomas Busch (ed.), Merleau-Ponty, Hermeneutics and Postmodernism.   (Google) 
 
McGill, V. J. (1930). An analysis of the experience of time. Journal of Philosophy 27 (20):533-544.   (Google | More links) 





 
McGilvary, Evander Bradley (1914). Time and the experience of time. Philosophical Review 23 (2):121-145.   (Google | More links) 




 
McInerney, Peter K. (1991). Time and Experience. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Mcinerney, Peter K. (1988). What is still valuable in Husserl's analyses of inner time-consciousness. Journal of Philosophy 85 (November):605-616.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
McKinnon, Neil (2003). Presentism and consciousness. Australian Journal of Philosophy 81 (3):305-323.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The presentist view of time is psychologically appealing. I argue that, ironically, contingent facts about the temporal properties of consciousness are very difficult to square with presentism unless some form of mind/body dualism is embraced









 
Mensch, James (online). Husserl's account of our consciousness of time.   (Google) 
 
Mensch, James (online). Husserl’s account of the consciousness of time 4.0.Doc.   (Google) 
 
Mensch, James (online). Husserl's account of our consciousness of time-final.Doc.   (Google) 
 
Merlan, Philip (1947). Time consciousness in Husserl and Heidegger. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 8 (1):23-54.   (Google | More links) 




 
Miller, Izchak (1984). Husserl, Perception, And Temporal Awareness. Cambridge: MIT Press.   (Cited by 19 | Google) 
 
Mohanty, Jitendra N. (1988). Time: Linear or cyclic, and Husserl's phenomenology of inner time consciousness. Philosophia Naturalis 25:123-130.   (Google) 
 
Morris, David (2008). Diabetes, chronic illness and the bodily roots of ecstatic temporality. Human Studies 31 (4).   (Google)
Abstract: This article studies the phenomenology of chronic illness in light of phenomenology’s insights into ecstatic temporality and freedom. It shows how a chronic illness can, in lived experience, manifest itself as a disturbance of our usual relation to ecstatic temporality and thence as a disturbance of freedom. This suggests that ecstatic temporality is related to another sort of time—“provisional time”—that is in turn rooted in the body. The article draws on Merleau-Ponty’s Phenomenology of Perception and Heidegger’s Being and Time , shedding light on the latter’s concept of ecstatic temporality. It also discusses implications for self-management of chronic illness, especially in children
 
Mundle, Clement W. K. (1954). How specious is the 'specious present'? Mind 63 (January):26-48.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links) 






 
Myers, Gerald E. (1971). William James on time perception. Philosophy of Science 38 (September):353-360.   (Google | More links) 






 
Natsoulas, Thomas (2006). On the temporal continuity of human consciousness: Is James's firsthand description, after all, "inept"? Journal of Mind and Behavior 27 (2):121-148.   (Google) 
 
Natsoulas, Thomas (1993). The stream of consciousness: William James's specious present. Imagination, Cognition and Personality 12:367-385.   (Cited by 9 | Google) 
 
Novak, P. (1996). Buddhist meditation and consciousness of time. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (3):267-77.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Odegard, Douglas (1978). Phenomenal time. Ratio 20 (December):116-122.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Ornstein, Robert E. (1969). On the Experience of Time. Harmondsworth.   (Cited by 169 | Google | More links) 




 
Pelczar, Michael (2010). Must an appearance of succession involve a succession of appearances? Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 81 (1):49-63.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: It is argued that a subject who has an experience as of succession can have this experience at a time, or over a period of time, during which there occurs in him no succession of conscious mental states at all. Various metaphysical implications of this conclusion are explored. One premise of the main argument is that every experience is an experience as of succession. This implies that we cannot understand phenomenal temporality as a relation among experiences, but only as a primitive feature of experience, or else as something analyzable into wholly non-phenomenal terms.





 
Perry, John (2001). Time, consciousness and the knowledge argument. In The Importance of Time: Proceedings of the Philosophy of Time Society, 1995-2000. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Pub.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Phillips, Ian (2009). Experience and time. Dissertation, UCL   (Google)
Abstract: e are no less directly acquainted with the temporal structure of the world than with its spatial structure. We hear one word succeeding another; feel two taps as simultaneous; or see the glow of a firework persisting, before it finally fizzles and fades. However, time is special, for we not only experience temporal properties; experience itself is structured in time
 
Phillips, Ian (2010). Perceiving temporal properties. European Journal of Philosophy 18 (2):176-202.   (Google | More links) 





 
Phillips, Ian B. (2009). Robin le poidevin the images of time: An essay on temporal representation. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 60 (2):439-446.   (Google) 
 
Pitkin, Walter B. (1913). Time and the percept. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 10 (12):309-319.   (Google | More links) 





 
Plumer, Gilbert (1985). The myth of the specious present. Mind 94 (January):19-35.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 





 
Pockett, Susan (2003). How long is now? Phenomenology and the specious present. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 2 (1):55-68.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Prosser, Simon (2007). Could we experience the passage of time? Ratio 20 (1):75-90.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This is an expanded and revised discussion of the argument briefly put forward in my 'A New Problem for the A-Theory of Time', where it is claimed that it is impossible to experience real temporal passage and that no such phenomenon exists. In the first half of the paper the premises of the argument are discussed in more detail than before. In the second half responses are given to several possible objections, none of which were addressed in the earlier paper. There is also some discussion of some related epistemic arguments against the passage of time given by Huw Price and David Braddon-Mitchell along with objections raised against them recently by Tim Maudlin and Peter Forrest respectively







 
Roache, Rebecca (1999). Mellor and Dennett on the perception of temporal order. Philosophical Quarterly 50 (195):231-238.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 








 
Roberts, Joy H. (1985). On Russell's rejection of akoluthic sensations. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 45 (June):595-600.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Robbins, Stephen E. (2007). Time, form and the limits of qualia. Journal of Mind and Behavior 28 (1):19-43.   (Google) 
 
Romanes, George J. (1878). Consciousness of time. Mind 3 (11):297-303.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Rosenthal, David M. (1992). Time and consciousness. Behavioral And Brain Sciences 15 (2):220-221.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Ruhnau, Eva (1995). Time gestalt and the observer. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Paderborn: Ferdinand SchÃ¶ningh.   (Cited by 37 | Google) 
 
Rutgers Marshall, Henry (1904). Of 'time perception'. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 1 (23):629-636.   (Google | More links) 




 
Sallis, John C. (1971). Time, subjectivity, and the phenomenology of perception. Modern Schoolman 48 (May):343-358.   (Google) 
 
Sandowsky, Louis N. (2006). Hume and Husserl: The problem of the continuity or temporalization of consciousness. International Philosophical Quarterly, Pt 1 (181):59-74.   (Google)
Abstract: This paper examines Husserl’s fascination with the issues raised by Hume’s critique of the philosophy of the ego and the continuity of consciousness. The path taken here follows a continental and phenomenological approach. Husserl’s 1905 lecture course on the temporalization of immanent time-consciousness is a phenomenological-eidetic examination of how the continuity of consciousness and the consciousness of continuity are possible. It was by way of Husserl’s reading of Hume’s discussion of “flux” or “flow” that his discourse on temporal phenomena led to the classification of a point-like now as a “fiction” and opened up a horizonal approach to the present that Hume’s introspective analyses presuppose but that escaped the limitations of the language that was available to him. In order to demonstrate the radicality of Husserl’s temporal investigations and his inspiration in the work of Hume, I show how his phenomenological discourse on the living temporal flow of consciousness resolves the latter’s concern about the problem of continuity by re-thinking how, in the absence of an abiding impression of Self, experience is continuous throughout the flux of its impressions
 
Searle, John R. (1956). Report on does it make sense to suppose that all events, including personal experiences, could occur in reverse? Analysis 16 (June):124.   (Google) 
 
Segal, Eliaz (2004). The mind's direction of time. Journal of Mind and Behavior 25 (3):227-235.   (Google) 
 
Sherover, Charles M. (1975). The Human Experience of Time: The Development of its Philosophic Meaning. Northwestern University Press.   (Google) 
 
Spicker, Stuart F. (1973). Inner time and lived-through time: Husserl and Merleau-ponty. Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology 4 (October):235-247.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Stern, L. William (2005). Mental presence-time. In The New Yearbook for Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy Volume 5, 2005, Burt Hopkins and Steven Crowell (Eds). Seattle: Noesis Press.   (Google) 
 
Tani, Jun (2004). The dynamical systems accounts for phenomenology of immanent time: An interpretation by revisiting a robotics synthetic study. Journal of Consciousness Studies 11 (9):5-24.   (Cited by 6 | Google) 
 
Thompson, David L. (online). The phenomenology of internal time-consciousness.   (Google)
Abstract: Outline by Section: I. INTRODUCTION: METHOD OF PHENOMENOLOGY II. REDUCTION FROM DOGMAS III. EXAMPLES OF PHENOMENOLOGICAL DESCRIPTION OF A. SENTENCE B. MELODY C. DIAGRAM OF TIME IV. MODIFICATIONS AS MODES OF TEMPORAL STRUCTURE V. RETENTION VI. CONSTITUTION OF EXTERNAL TIME Time present and time past
 
Thurstone, Louis L. (1919). The anticipatory aspect of consciousness. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 16 (21):561-568.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Valaris, Markos (2008). Inner sense, self-affection, and temporal consciousness in Kant's critique of pure reason. Philosophers' Imprint 8 (4):1-18.   (Google)
Abstract: In §24 of the Transcendental Deduction, Kant remarks that his account of the capacity of the understanding to spontaneously determine sensibility explains how empirical self-knowledge is possible through inner-sense. Although most commentators consider Kant's conception of empirical self-knowledge through inner sense to be either a failure or at least drastically under-developed, I argue that (just as Kant claims) his account of the capacity of the understanding to determine sensibility - the "productive imagination" - can ground an attractive account of self-knowledge. The account of inner sense I propose, however, may seem to conflict with some of Kant's views on time. I close the paper by arguing that the apparent conflict is not a fault specific to my account of inner sense, but rather indicative of a deeper tension, internal to Kant's views on time
 
Varela, Francisco J. (1999). Present-time consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 6 (2-3):111-140.   (Cited by 38 | Google) 
 
Varela, Francisco (1999). The specious present: A neurophenomenology of time consciousness. In Jean Petitot, Franscisco J. Varela, Barnard Pacoud & Jean-Michel Roy (eds.), Naturalizing Phenomenology. Stanford University Press.   (Cited by 61 | Google) 
 
Vogeley, Kai & Kupke, Christian (2007). Disturbances of time consciousness from a phenomenological and neuroscientific perspective. Schizophrenia Bulletin 33 (1):157-165.   (Google | More links) 





 
Waldenfels, Bernhard (2000). Time lag: Motifs for a phenomenology of the experience of time. Research in Phenomenology 30 (1):107-119.   (Google) 
 
Ward, Mary (1926). Discussions: James ward on sense and thought. Mind 35 (140).   (Google) 
 
Wearden, J. H. (2001). Internal clocks and the representation of time. In Christoph Hoerl & Teresa McCormark (eds.), Time and Memory. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Williams, Clifford E. (1992). The phenomenology of b-time. Southern Journal of Philosophy 30 (2):123-137.   (Cited by 7 | Google) 
 
Zahavi, Dan (2003). Inner time-consciousness and pre-reflective self-awareness. In Donn Welton (ed.), The New Husserl: A Critical Reader. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.   (Cited by 6 | Google)
Abstract: If one looks at the current discussion of self-awareness there seems to be a general agreement that whatever valuable philosophical contributions Husserl might have made, his account of self-awareness is not among them. This prevalent appraisal is often based on the claim that Husserl was too occupied with the problem of intentionality to ever really pay attention to the issue of self-awareness. Due to his interest in intentionality Husserl took object-consciousness as the paradigm of every kind of awareness and therefore settled with a model of self-awareness based upon the subject-object dichotomy, with its entailed difference between the intending and the intended. As a consequence, Husserl never discovered the existence of pre-reflective self- awareness, but remained stuck in the traditional, but highly problematic reflection model of self-awareness
 
Zahavi, Dan (2007). Perception of duration presupposes duration of perception - or does it? Husserl and Dainton on time. International Journal of Philosophical Studies 15 (3):453 – 471.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In his recent book The Stream of Consciousness, Dainton provides what must surely count as one of the most comprehensive discussions of time-consciousness in analytical philosophy. In the course of doing so, he also challenges Husserl's classical account in a number of ways. In the following contribution, I will compare Dainton's and Husserl's respective accounts. Such a comparison will not only make it evident why an analysis of time-consciousness is so important, but will also provide a neat opportunity to appraise the contemporary relevance of Husserl's analysis. How does it measure up against one of the more recent analytical accounts?





 
Zahavi, Dan (2004). Time and consciousness in the bernau manuscripts. Husserl Studies 20 (2).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Even a cursory glance in Die Bernauer Manuskripte über das Zeitbewusstsein makes it evident that one of Husserl’s major concerns in his 1917-18 reflections on time-consciousness was how to account for the constitution of time without giving rise to an infinite regress. Not only does Husserl constantly refer to this problem in Husserliana XXXIII – as he characteristically writes at one point “Überall drohen, scheint es, unendliche Regresse”(Hua 33/81) – but he also takes care to distinguish between several different regresses (cf. Hua 33/271). One of the more troubling ones is the one that might be called the regress of foundation. It concerns the problem of how to avoid always having to presuppose yet another underlying constituting consciousness. As we will soon see, the attempt to avoid this specific regress is closely linked to the problem of how to come up with a satisfactory account of self-awareness. That Husserl himself was well aware of this link can be inferred from some of his reflections in the beginning of Husserliana XXXIII. As he writes at one point, consciousness exists, it exists as a stream, and it appears to itself as a stream. But how the stream of consciousness is capable of being conscious of itself, how it is possible and comprehensible that the very being of the stream is a form of self-consciousness, is the enduring problem of the entire treatise (Hua 33/44, 46). In this article, I wish to take a closer look at some of Husserl’s attempts in the Bernau Manuscripts to account for time-consciousness without giving rise to an infinite regress





 
1.6g Consciousness of Action




Aguilar, Jesús H. & Buckareff, Andrei A. (2009). Agency, consciousness, and executive control. Philosophia 37 (1).   (Google)
Abstract: On the Causal Theory of Action (CTA), internal proper parts of an agent such as desires and intentions are causally responsible for actions. CTA has increasingly come under attack for its alleged failure to account for agency. A recent version of this criticism due to François Schroeter proposes that CTA cannot provide an adequate account of either the executive control or the autonomous control involved in full-fledged agency. Schroeter offers as an alternative a revised understanding of the proper role of consciousness in agency. In this paper we criticize Schroeter’s analysis of the type of consciousness involved in executive control and examine the way in which the conscious self allegedly intervenes in action. We argue that Schroeter’s proposal should not be preferred over recent versions of CTA
 
Andersen, Holly, Causation and the awareness of agency.   (Google)
Abstract: I criticize the tendency to address the causal role of awareness in agency in terms of the awareness of agency, and argue that this distorts the causal import of experimental results in significant ways. I illustrate, using the work of Shaun Gallagher, how the tendency to focus on the awareness of agency obscures the role of extrospective awareness by considering it only in terms of what it contributes to the awareness of agency. Focus on awareness of agency separates awareness from agency itself, and then turns it inwards to introspect distinct agentive processes. If we then assume that the causal influence of awareness is directed at the same object as awareness itself, then the only avenue for conscious causal involvement in action is to somehow interfere with the separate, even neuronal, processes leading to action. I label this the Micromanagement Model of conscious agency, because it forces awareness to micromanage other, nonconscious, processes in order to be causally efficacious. Implicit adherence to the Micromanagement Model prejudices us towards the mistaken conclusion that awareness has limited to no causal role in action
 
Andersen, Holly (ms). Two causal mistakes in Wegner's illusion of conscious will.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Daniel Wegner argues that our feelings of conscious will are illusory: these feelings are not causally involved in the production of action, which is rather governed by unconscious neural processes. I argue that Wegner's interpretation of neuroscientific results rests on two fallacious causal assumptions, neither of which are supported by the evidence. Each assumption involves a Cartesian disembodiment of conscious will, and it is this disembodiment that results in the appearance of causal inefficacy, rather than any interesting features of conscious will. Wegner's fallacies illustrate two take-away points to heed if making claims about the causal structure of agency





 
Annas, Julia (2008). The phenomenology of virtue. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 7 (1):21-34.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: What is it like to be a good person? I examine and reject suggestions that this will involve having thoughts which have virtue or being a good person as part of their content, as well as suggestions that it might be the presence of feelings distinct from the virtuous person’s thoughts. Is there, then, anything after all to the phenomenology of virtue? I suggest that an answer is to be found in looking to Aristotle’s suggestion that virtuous activity is pleasant to the virtuous person. I try to do this, using the work of the contemporary social psychologist Mihalyi Csikszentmihalyi and his work on the ‘flow experience’. Crucial here is the point that I consider accounts of virtue which take it to have the structure of a practical expertise or skill. It is when we are most engaged in skilful complex activity that the activity is experienced as ‘unimpeded’, in Aristotle’s terms, or as ‘flow’. This experience does not, as might at first appear, preclude thoughtful involvement and reflection. Although we can say what in general the phenomenology of virtue is like, each of us only has some more or less dim idea of it from the extent to which we are virtuous—that is, for most of us, not very much






 
Bayne, Timothy J. (2006). Phenomenology and the feeling of doing: Wegner on the conscious will. In Susan Pockett, William P. Banks & Shaun Gallagher (eds.), Does Consciousness Cause Behavior? MIT Press.   (Cited by 5 | Google)
Abstract: Given its ubiquitous presence in everyday experience, it is surprising that the phenomenology of doing—the experience of being an agent—has received such scant attention in the consciousness literature. But things are starting to change, and a small but growing literature on the content and causes of the phenomenology of first-person agency is beginning to emerge.2 One of the most influential and stimulating figures in this literature is Daniel Wegner. In a series of papers and his book The Illusion of Conscious Will (ICW) Wegner has developed..
 
Bayne, Timothy J. (ms). Putting the experience of acting in its place.   (Google)
Abstract: Although the notion can be found in Anscombe
 
Bayne, Timothy J. & Levy, Neil (2006). The feeling of doing: Deconstructing the phenomenology of agnecy. In Natalie Sebanz & Wolfgang Prinz (eds.), Disorders of Volition. MIT Press.   (Cited by 12 | Google)
Abstract: Disorders of volition are often accompanied by, and may even be caused by, disruptions in the phenomenology of agency. Yet the phenomenology of agency is at present little explored. In this paper we attempt to describe the experience of normal agency, in order to uncover its representational content
 
Bayne, Tim (forthcoming). The phenomenology of agency. Philosophy Compass.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The phenomenology of agency has, until recently, been rather neglected, overlooked by both philosophers of action and philosophers of consciousness alike. Thankfully, all that has changed, and of late there has been an explosion of interest in what it is like to be an agent. 1 This burgeoning field crosses the traditional boundaries between disciplines: philosophers of psychopathology are speculating about the role that unusual experiences of agency might play in accounting for disorders of thought and action; cognitive scientists are developing models of how the phenomenology of agency is generated; and philosophers of mind are drawing connections between the phenomenology of agency and the nature of introspection, phenomenal character, and agency itself. My aim in this paper is not to provide an exhaustive survey of this recent literature, but to provide a..





 
Bayne, Tim, The sense of agency.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Where in cognitive architecture do experiences of agency lie? This chapter defends the claim that such states qualify as a species of perception. Reference to ‘the sense of agency’ should not be taken as a mere façon de parler but picks out a genuinely perceptual system. The chapter begins by outlining the perceptual model of agentive experience before turning to its two main rivals: the doxastic model, according to which agentive experience is really a species of belief, and the telic model, according to which agentive experience is really a species of agency. I conclude by defending the perceptual model against a number of objections to it, and by briefly exploring its implications for the question of how to approach the study of perception





 
Bittner, T. J. (1996). Consciousness and the act of will. Philosophical Studies 81 (2-3):31-41.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links) 




 
Carruthers, Peter, Action-awareness and the active mind.   (Google)
Abstract: Anscombe (1957) famously claimed that we have non-observational knowledge of our own physical actions. We have immediate knowledge of what it is that we are doing, she argued, without having to rely on or draw inferences from any independently accessible perceptual cues or bodily sensations. In a pair of recent papers and his new book, Peacocke (2007, 2008a, 2008b) takes up and defends this claim, and extends it into the domain of mental action.1 He aims to provide an account of action-awareness that will generalize to explain how we have immediate, non-inferential, awareness of our own judgments, decisions, imaginings, and so forth. These claims form an important component in a much larger philosophical edifice, with many implications for the philosophy of mind and for epistemology. But Peacocke’s argument limps at both steps. I shall show that he has provided insufficient grounds for accepting Anscombe’s claim, and that the account of action-awareness that he provides doesn’t, in any case, generalize to mental actions of the sort that he intends
 
Carter, William R. (1982). Comments on L. H. Davis, What is It Like to Be an Agent?. Erkenntnis 18 (September):215-221.   (Google | More links) 




 
Carruthers, Peter (2007). The illusion of conscious will. Synthese 96.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Wegner (Wegner, D. (2002). The illusion of conscious will. MIT Press) argues that conscious will is an illusion, citing a wide range of empirical evidence. I shall begin by surveying some of his arguments. Many are unsuccessful. But one—an argument from the ubiquity of self-interpretation—is more promising. Yet is suffers from an obvious lacuna, offered by so-called ‘dual process’ theories of reasoning and decision making (Evans, J., & Over, D. (1996). Rationality and reasoning. Psychology Press; Stanovich, K. (1999). Who is rational? Studies of individual differences in reasoning. Lawrence Erlbaum; Frankish, K. (2004). Mind and supermind. Cambridge University Press). I shall argue that this lacuna can be filled by a plausible a priori claim about the causal role of anything deserving to be called ‘a will.’ The result is that there is no such thing as conscious willing: conscious will is, indeed, an illusion.






 
Choudhury, Suparna & Blakemore, Sarah-Jayne (2006). Intentions, actions, and the self. In Susan Pockett, William P. Banks & Shaun Gallagher (eds.), Does Consciousness Cause Behavior? MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
Cole, Jonathan (2007). The phenomenology of agency and intention in the face of paralysis and insentience. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 6 (3):309-325.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Studies of perception have focussed on sensation, though more recently the perception of action has, once more, become the subject of investigation. These studies have looked at acute experimental situations. The present paper discusses the subjective experience of those with either clinical syndromes of loss of movement or sensation (spinal cord injury, sensory neuronopathy syndrome or motor stroke), or with experimental paralysis or sensory loss. The differing phenomenology of these is explored and their effects on intention and agency discussed. It is shown that sensory loss can have effects on the focussing of motor command and that for some a sense of agency can return despite paralysis






 
Carruthers, Glenn (2009). Commentary on Synofzik, Vosgerau and Newen 2008. Consciousness and Cognition 18 (2):515-520.   (Google)
Abstract: Synofzik, Vosgerau, and Newen (2008) offer a powerful explanation of the sense of agency. To argue for their model they attempt to show that one of the standard models (the comparator model) fails to explain the sense of agency and that their model offers a more general account than is aimed at by the standard model. Here I offer comment on both parts of this argument. I offer an alternative reading of some of the data they use to argue against the comparator model. I argue that contrary to Synofzik, Vosgerau and Newen’s reading the case of G.L. supports rather than contradicts the comparator model. Next I suggest how the comparator model can differentiate failures of action attribution in patients suffering parietal lobe lesions and delusions of alien control. I also argue that the apparently unexpected phenomenon of “hyperassociation” is predicted by the comparator model. Finally I suggest that as it stands Synofzik, Vosgerau and Newen’s model is not well specified enough to explain deficits in the sense of agency associated with delusions of thought insertion. Thus they have not met their second argumentative burden of showing how their model is more general than the comparator model.
 
Cunning, David (1999). Agency and consciousness. Synthese 120 (2):271-294.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Daprati, E.; Franck, N.; Georgieff, N.; Proust, Joëlle; Pacherie, Elisabeth; Dalery, J. & Jeannerod, Marc (1997). Looking for the agent: An investigation into consciousness of action and self-consciousness in schizophrenic patients. Cognition 65:71-86.   (Cited by 179 | Google | More links) 








 
Davis, Lawrence H. (1982). What is it like to be an agent? Erkenntnis 18 (September):195-213.   (Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Dokic, J (2003). The sense of ownership: An analogy between sensation and action. In Johannes Roessler (ed.), Agency and Self-Awareness: Issues in Philosophy and Psychology. Oxford: Clarendon Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Eilan, Naomi M. & Roessler, Johannes (2003). Agency and self-awareness: Mechanisms and epistemology. In Johannes Roessler (ed.), Agency and Self-Awareness: Issues in Philosophy and Psychology. Oxford: Clarendon Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Filice, Carlo (1988). Non-substantial streams of consciousness and free action. International Studies in Philosophy 20:1-11.   (Google) 
 
Gallagher, Shaun (2005). Consciousness and free will. Danish Yearbook of Philosophy 39:7-16.   (Google) 
 
Gallagher, Shaun (2007). The natural philosophy of agency. Philosophy Compass 2 (2):347–357.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: A review of several theories and brain-imaging experiments shows that there is no consensus about how to define the sense of agency. In some cases the sense of agency is construed in terms of bodily movement or motor control, in others it is linked to the intentional aspect of action. For some theorists it is the product of higher-order cognitive processes, for others it is a feature of first-order phenomenal experience. In this article I propose a multiple aspects account of the sense of agency






 
Georgieff, N. & Jeannerod, Marc (1998). Beyond consciousness of external reality: A ''who'' system for consciousness of action and self-consciousness. Consciousness and Cognition 7 (3):465-477.   (Cited by 88 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper offers a framework for consciousness of internal reality. Recent PET experiments are reviewed, showing partial overlap of cortical activation during self-produced actions and actions observed from other people. This overlap suggests that representations for actions may be shared by several individuals, a situation which creates a potential problem for correctly attributing an action to its agent. The neural conditions for correct agency judgments are thus assigned a key role in self/other distinction and self-consciousness. A series of behavioral experiments that demonstrate, in normal subjects, the poor monitoring of action-related signals and the difficulty in recognizing self-produced actions are described. In patients presenting delusions, this difficulty dramatically increases and actions become systematically misattributed. These results point to schizophrenia and related disorders as a paradigmatic alteration of a ''Who?'' system for self-consciousness







 
Georgieff, Nicolas & Rossetti, Yves (1999). How does implicit and explicit knowledge fit in the consciousness of action? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22 (5):765-766.   (Google)
Abstract: Dienes & Perner's (D&P's) target articles proposes an analysis of explicit knowledge based on a progressive transformation of implicit into explicit products, applying this gradient to different aspects of knowledge that can be represented. The goal is to integrate a philosophical concept of knowledge with relevant psychophysical and neuropsychological data. D&P seem to fill an impressive portion of the gap between these two areas. We focus on two examples where a full synthesis of theoretical and empirical data seems difficult to establish and would require further refinement of the model: action representation and the closely related consciousness of action, which is in turn related to self-consciousness
 
Gill, Michael (2008). Variability and moral phenomenology. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 7 (1):99-113.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Many moral philosophers in the Western tradition have used phenomenological claims as starting points for philosophical inquiry; aspects of moral phenomenology have often been taken to be anchors to which any adequate account of morality must remain attached. This paper raises doubts about whether moral phenomena are universal and robust enough to serve the purposes to which moral philosophers have traditionally tried to put them. Persons’ experiences of morality may vary in a way that greatly limits the extent to which moral phenomenology can constitute a reason to favor one moral theory over another. Phenomenology may not be able to serve as a pre-theoretic starting point or anchor in the consideration of rival moral theories because moral phenomenology may itself be theory-laden. These doubts are illustrated through an examination of how moral phenomenology is used in the thought of Ralph Cudworth, Samuel Clarke, Joseph Butler, Francis Hutcheson, and Søren Kierkegaard







 
Hannay, Alastair (1991). Consciousness and the experience of freedom. In Ernest Lepore & Robert Van Gulick (eds.), John Searle and His Critics. Cambridge: Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Hohwy, Jakob (2005). The experience of mental causation. Behavior and Philosophy 32 (2):377-400.   (Cited by 2 | Google)
Abstract: subjects mean when they report their mental states it is useful to be guided by a sound grasp of their concepts for mental events. 3 Though this is often ignored in favor of libertarian notions of free will, in which free action is seen as completely undetermined by the subject
 
Horgan, Terry & Timmons, Mark (2008). Prolegomena to a future phenomenology of morals. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 7 (1):115-131.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Moral phenomenology is (roughly) the study of those features of occurrent mental states with moral significance which are accessible through direct introspection, whether or not such states possess phenomenal character – a what-it-is-likeness. In this paper, as the title indicates, we introduce and make prefatory remarks about moral phenomenology and its significance for ethics. After providing a brief taxonomy of types of moral experience, we proceed to consider questions about the commonality within and distinctiveness of such experiences, with an eye on some of the main philosophical issues in ethics and how moral phenomenology might be brought to bear on them. In discussing such matters, we consider some of the doubts about moral phenomenology and its value to ethics that are brought up by Walter Sinnott-Armstrong and Michael Gill in their contributions to this issue






 
Horgan, Terence E.; Tienson, John L. & Graham, George (2003). The phenomenology of first-person agency. In Sven Walter & Heinz-Dieter Heckmann (eds.), Physicalism and Mental Causation. Imprint Academic.   (Cited by 14 | Google) 
 
Hossack, Keith (2003). Consciousness in act and action. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 2 (3):187-203.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Hurley, Susan L. (1998). Self-consciousness, spontaneity, and the myth of the giving. In Consciousness in Action. Cambridge.   (Google)
Abstract: From my Consciousness in Action, ch. 2; see Consciousness in Action for bibligraphy. This chapter revises material from "Kant on Spontaneity and the Myth of the Giving", Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1993-94, pp. 137-164, and "Myth Upon Myth", Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1996, vol. 96, pp. 253-260
 
Jeannerod, Marc (2003). Consciousness of action and self-consciousness: A cognitive neuroscience approach. In Agency and Self-Awareness: Issues in Philosophy and Psychology. Oxford: Clarendon Press.   (Cited by 12 | Google) 
 
Jeannerod, Marc (2006). Consciousness of action as an embodied consciousness. In Susan Pockett, William P. Banks & Shaun Gallagher (eds.), Does Consciousness Cause Behavior? MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
Jeannerod, Marc (2007). Consciousness of action. In Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Kriegel, Uriah (2008). Moral phenomenology: Foundational issues. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 7 (1):1-19.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper, I address the what, the how, and the why of moral phenomenology. I consider first the question What is moral phenomenology?, secondly the question How to pursue moral phenomenology?, and thirdly the question Why pursue moral phenomenology? My treatment of these questions is preliminary and tentative, and is meant not so much to settle them as to point in their answers’ direction






 
Leiter, Brian (2007). Nietzsche's theory of the will. Philosophers' Imprint 7 (7):1-15.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The essay offers a philosophical reconstruction of Nietzsche’s theory of the will, focusing on (1) Nietzsche’s account of the phenomenology of “willing” an action, the experience we have which leads us (causally) to conceive of ourselves as exercising our will; (2) Nietzsche’s arguments that the experiences picked out by the phenomenology are not causally connected to the resulting action (at least not in a way sufficient to underwrite ascriptions of moral responsibility); and (3) Nietzsche’s account of the actual causal genesis of action. Particular attention is given to passages from Daybreak, Beyond Good and Evil and Twilight of the Idols and a revised version of my earlier account of Nietzsche’s epiphenomenalism is defended. Finally, recent work in empirical psychology (Libet, Wegner) is shown to support Nietzsche’s skepticism that our “feeling” of will is a reliable guide to the causation of action






 
Mandik, Pete (forthcoming). Control consciousness. Topics in Cognitive Science.   (Google)
Abstract: Control consciousness is the awareness or experience of seeming to be in control of one’s actions. One view, which I will be arguing against in the present paper, is that control consciousness is a form of sensory consciousness. On such a view, control consciousness is exhausted by sensory elements such as tactile and proprioceptive information. An opposing view, which I will be arguing for, is that sensory elements cannot be the whole story and must be supplemented by direct contributions of nonsensory, motor elements. More specifically, I will be arguing for the view that the neural basis of control consciousness is constituted by states of recurrent activation in relatively intermediate levels of the motor hierarchy.
 
Metzinger, Thomas (2006). Conscious volition and mental representation: Toward a more fine-grained analysis. In Natalie Sebanz & Wolfgang Prinz (eds.), Disorders of Volition. MIT Press.   (Cited by 11 | Google)
Abstract: A Bradford Book The MIT Press Cambridge, Massachusetts London, England
 
Mossel, Benjamin (2005). Action, control and sensations of acting. Philosophical Studies 124 (2):129-180.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Sensations of acting and control have been neglected in theory of action. I argue that they form the core of action and are integral and indispensible parts of our actions, participating as they do in feedback loops consisting of our intentions in acting, the bodily movements required for acting and the sensations of acting. These feedback loops underlie all activities in which we engage when we act and generate our control over our movements.The events required for action according to the causal theory, or Searle






 
Nahmias, Eddy (2005). Agency, authorship, and illusion. Consciousness and Cognition 14 (4):771-785.   (Cited by 2 | Google)
Abstract: Daniel Wegner argues that conscious will is an illusion. I examine the adequacy of his theory of apparent mental causation and whether, if accurate, it suggests that our experience of agency and authorship should be considered illusory. I examine various interpretations of this claim and raise problems for each interpretation. I also distinguish between the experiences of agency and authorship.
 
Nahmias, Eddy A. (2002). When consciousness matters: A critical review of Daniel Wegner's the illusion of conscious will. Philosophical Psychology 15 (4):527-541.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In The illusion of conscious will , Daniel Wegner offers an exciting, informative, and potentially threatening treatise on the psychology of action. I offer several interpretations of the thesis that conscious will is an illusion. The one Wegner seems to suggest is "modular epiphenomenalism": conscious experience of will is produced by a brain system distinct from the system that produces action; it interprets our behavior but does not, as it seems to us, cause it. I argue that the evidence Wegner presents to support this theory, though fascinating, is inconclusive and, in any case, he has not shown that conscious will does not play a crucial causal role in planning, forming intentions, etc. This theory's potential blow to our self-conception turns out to be a glancing one






 
Newen, Albert, Reply to Carruthers.   (Google)
Abstract: Glenn Carruthers presents a very detailed and thorough critique of our multi-factorial twostep account of agency to the effect that it would not succeed in being superior and more general as the comparator model (CM). This critique gives us the opportunity to refine some of our points and to make the overall argument clearer. As Carruthers notes, “This move [the distinction between a feeling of agency (FoA) and a judgment of agency (JoA)] usefully limits the explanatory target of the CM to FoA”. This is exactly right in our view but contrasts with a lot of views present in the empirical literature which neglect this important difference. As a paradigmatic example see the claim by Jeannerod that “agency judgements made by the subject are based on the state of the comparator (Jeannerod, 1999, pp. 17-18) (for further experimental conflation of feeling and judgement of agency see e.g.Daprati et al., 1997; Farrer et al., 2003b). Thus, with this point we are not only fighting straw men but show severe limits of the explanatory force of the comparator model
 
Nida-Rümelin, Martine (2007). Doings and subject causation. Erkenntnis 67 (2).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In the center of this paper is a phenomenological claim: we experience ourselves in our own doings and we experience others when we perceive them in their doings as active in the sense of being a cause of the corresponding physical event. These experiences are fundamental to the way we view ourselves and others. It is therefore desirable for any philosophical theory to be compatible with the content of these experiences and thus to avoid the attribution of radical and permanent error to human experience. A theory of ‘subject causation’ according to which the active subject continuously and simultaneously causes physical changes is sketched. This account is—according to the phenomenological claim defended—compatible with the content of our daily experiences in doing something and in observing others in their doings and it has a number of further more theoretical advantages: it does not touch the autonomy of neurophysiology and it is compatible with a thesis of supervenience of the mental on the physical. It does however require a weak version of subject-body dualism





 
Pacherie, Elisabeth & Bayne, Tim (2007). Narrators and Comparators: The Architecture of Agentive Self-awareness. Synthese 159:475 - 491.   (Google)
Abstract: This paper contrasts two approaches to agentive self-awareness: a high level, narrative-based account, and a low-level comparator-based account. We argue that an agent's narrative self-conception has a role to play in explaining their agentive judgments, but that agentive experiences are explained by low-level comparator mechanisms that are grounded in the very machinery responsible for action-production. 
 
Pacherie, Elisabeth (2007). The Anarchic Hand Syndrome and Utilization Behavior: A Window onto Agentive Self-Awareness. Functional Neurology 22 (4):211 - 217.   (Google)
Abstract: Two main approaches can be discerned in the literature on agentive self-awareness: a top-down approach, according to which agentive self-awareness is fundamentally holistic in nature and involves the operations of a central-systems narrator, and a bottom-up approach that sees agentive self-awareness as produced by lowlevel processes grounded in the very machinery responsible for motor production and control. Neither approach is entirely satisfactory if taken in isolation; however, the question of whether their combination would yield a full account of agentive self-awareness remains very much open. In this paper, I contrast two disorders affecting the control of voluntary action: the anarchic hand syndrome and utilization behavior. Although in both conditions patients fail to inhibit actions that are elicited by objects in the environment but inappropriate with respect to the wider context, these actions are experienced in radically different ways by the two groups of patients. I discuss how top-down and bottom-up processes involved in the generation of agentive self-awareness would have to be related in order to account for these differences.
 
Pacherie, Elisabeth (2008). The Phenomenology of Action: A Conceptual Framework. Cognition 107 (1):179 - 217.   (Google)
Abstract: After a long period of neglect, the phenomenology of action has recently regained its place in the agenda of philosophers and scientists alike. The recent explosion of interest in the topic highlights its complexity. The purpose of this paper is to propose a conceptual framework allowing for a more precise characterization of the many facets of the phenomenology of agency, of how they are related and of their possible sources. The key assumption guiding this attempt is that the processes through which the phenomenology of action is generated and the processes involved in the specification and control of action are strongly interconnected. I argue in favor of a three-tiered dynamic model of intention, link it to an expanded version of the internal model theory of action control and specification, and use this theoretical framework to guide an analysis of the contents, possible sources and temporal course of complementary aspects of the phenomenology of action.
 
Pacherie, Elisabeth (2007). The Sense of Control and the Sense of Agency. Psyche 13 (1):1 - 30.   (Google)
Abstract: The now growing literature on the content and sources of the phenomenology of first-person agency highlights the multi-faceted character of the phenomenology of agency and makes it clear that the experience of agency includes many other experiences as components. This paper examines the possible relations between these components of our experience of acting and the processes involved in action specification and action control. After a brief discussion of our awareness of our goals and means of action, it will focus on the sense of agency for a given action, understood as the sense the agent has that he or she is the author of that action. I argue that the sense of agency can be analyzed as a compound of more basic experiences, including the experience of intentional causation, the sense of initiation and the sense of control. I further argue that the sense of control may itself be analysed into a number of more specific, partially dissociable experiences.
 
Peacocke, Christopher (2003). Action: Awareness, ownership, and knowledge. In Johannes Roessler (ed.), Agency and Self-Awareness: Issues in Philosophy and Psychology. Oxford: Clarendon Press.   (Cited by 7 | Google) 
 
Preston, Jesse; Gray, Kurt & Wegner, Daniel M. (2006). The godfather of soul. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 29 (5):482-+.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: An important component of souls is the capacity for free will, as the origin of agency within an individual. Belief in souls arises in part from the experience of conscious will, a compelling feeling of personal causation that accompanies almost every action we take, and suggests that an immaterial self is in charge of the physical body







 
Prinz, Jesse J. (2007). All consciousness is perceptual. In Brian P. McLaughlin & Jonathan D. Cohen (eds.), Contemporary Debates in Philosophy of Mind. Blackwell.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Rosenthal, David M. (2002). The timing of conscious states. Consciousness and Cognition 11 (2):215-20.   (Cited by 11 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Striking experimental results by Benjamin Libet and colleagues have had an impor- tant impact on much recent discussion of consciousness. Some investigators have sought to replicate or extend Libet’s results (Haggard, 1999; Haggard & Eimer, 1999; Haggard, Newman, & Magno, 1999; Trevena & Miller, 2002), while others have focused on how to interpret those ﬁndings (e.g., Gomes, 1998, 1999, 2002; Pockett, 2002), which many have seen as conﬂicting with our commonsense picture of mental functioning






 
Sachse, Christian (2007). What about a reductionist approach? Comments on Terry Horgan. Erkenntnis 67 (2).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In his work, Horgan argues for the compatibilism of agency, mental state-causation, and physical causal-closure. We generally assume a causally closed physical world that seems to exclude agency in the sense of mental state-causation in addition to physical causation. However, Horgan argues for an account of agency that satisfies the experience of our own as acting persons and that is compatible with physical causal-closure. Mental properties are causal properties but not identical with physical properties because there are different ontological levels. In this commentary, I shall reconsider the essential issues of this compatibilism (1), focus on a problem for Horgan’s conception of agent causation that arises from the causal argument for ontological reductionism (2), and propose to embed Horgan’s conception of agency within a reductionist approach in order to vindicate the indispensable character of agency (3)





 
Sinnott-Armstrong, Walter (2008). Is moral phenomenology unified? Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 7 (1):85-97.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In this short paper, I argue that the phenomenology of moral judgment is not unified across different areas of morality (involving harm, hierarchy, reciprocity, and impurity) or even across different relations to harm. Common responses, such as that moral obligations are experienced as felt demands based on a sense of what is fitting, are either too narrow to cover all moral obligations or too broad to capture anything important and peculiar to morality. The disunity of moral phenomenology is, nonetheless, compatible with some uses of moral phenomenology for moral epistemology and with the objectivity and justifiability of parts of morality






 
Smith, David Woodruff (1992). Consciousness in action. Synthese 90 (1):119-43.   (Cited by 9 | Google | More links) 




 
Strawson, Galen (2003). Mental ballistics or the involuntariness of spontaniety. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 103 (3):227-257.   (Google | More links) 




 
Straus, Erwin W. (ed.) (1967). Phenomenology Of Will And Action. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press.   (Google) 
 
Sundstrom, Par (online). Consciousness and intentionality of action.   (Google) 
 
Synofzik, M.; Vosgerau, G. & Newen, A. (2008). Beyond the comparator model: A multi-factorial two-step account of agency. Consciousness and Cognition.   (Google)
Abstract: There is an increasing amount of empirical work investigating the sense of agency, i.e. the registration that we are the initiators of our own actions. Many studies try to relate the sense of agency to an internal feed-forward mechanism, called the ‘‘comparator model’’. In this paper, we draw a sharp distinction between a non-conceptual level of feeling of agency and a conceptual level of judgement of agency. By analyzing recent empirical studies, we show that the comparator model is not able to explain either. Rather, we argue for a two-step account: a multifactorial weighting process of different agency indicators accounts for the feeling of agency, which is, in a second step, further processed by conceptual modules to form an attribution judgement. This new framework is then applied to disruptions of agency in schizophrenia, for which the comparator model also fails. Two further extensions are discussed: We show that the comparator model can neither be extended to account for the sense of ownership (which also has to be differentiated into a feeling and a judgement of ownership) nor for the sense of agency for thoughts. Our framework, however, is able to provide a unified account for the sense of agency for both actions and thoughts.
 
Synofzik, Matthis; Vosgerau, Gottfried & Newen, Albert (2008). I move, therefore I am: A new theoretical framework to investigate agency and ownership. Consciousness and Cognition 17:411 - 424.   (Google)
Abstract: The neurocognitive structure of the acting self has recently been widely studied, yet is still perplexing and remains an often confounded issue in cognitive neuroscience, psychopathology and philosophy. We provide a new systematic account of two of its main features, the sense of agency and the sense of ownership, demonstrating that although both features appear as phenomenally uniform, they each in fact are complex crossmodal phenomena of largely heterogeneous functional and (self-)representational levels. These levels can be arranged within a gradually evolving, onto- and phylogenetically plausible framework which proceeds from basic non-conceptual sensorimotor processes to more complex conceptual and meta-representational processes of agency and ownership, respectively. In particular, three fundamental levels of agency and ownership processing have to be distinguished: The level of feeling, thinking and social interaction. This naturalistic account will not only allow to ‘‘ground the self in action”, but also provide an empirically testable taxonomy for cognitive neuroscience and a new tool for disentangling agency and ownership disturbances in psychopathology (e.g. alien hand, anarchic hand, anosognosia for one’s own hemiparesis).
 
Siegel, Susanna (2005). The Phenomenology of Efficacy. Philosophical Topics 33 (1):265-84.   (Google) 
 
Velmans, Max (2004). Why conscious free will both is and isn't an illusion. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 27 (5):677.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Wegner’s analysis of the illusion of conscious will is close to my own account of how conscious experiences relate to brain processes. But our analyses differ somewhat on how conscious will is not an illusion. Wegner argues that once conscious will arises it enters causally into subsequent mental processing. I argue that while his causal story is accurate, it remains a first-person story. Conscious free will is not an illusion in the sense that this first-person story is compatible with and complementary to a third-person account of voluntary processing in the mind/brain









 
Vosgerau, Gottfried & Newen, Albert (2007). Thoughts, motor actions, and the self. Mind and Language 22 (1):22–43.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The comparator-model, originally developed to explain motor action, has recently been invoked to explain several aspects of the self. However, in the first place it may not be used to explain a basic self-world distinction because it presupposes one. Our alternative account is based on specific systematic covariation between action and perception. Secondly, the comparator model cannot explain the feeling of ownership of thoughts. We argue—contra Frith and Campbell—that thoughts are not motor processes and therefore cannot be described by the comparator-model. Rather, thoughts can be the triggering cause (intention) for actions. An alternative framework for the explanation of thought insertion in schizophrenics is presented





 
Wakefield, Jerome C. & Dreyfus, Hubert L. (1991). Intentionality and the phenomenology of action. In Ernest Lepore & Robert Van Gulick (eds.), John Searle and His Critics. Cambridge: Blackwell.   (Cited by 14 | Google) 
 
Wegner, Daniel M. & Wheatley, T. (1999). Apparent mental causation: Sources of the experience of will. American Psychologist 54:480-492.   (Cited by 123 | Google | More links) 





 
Wegner, Daniel M. (2004). Frequently asked questions about conscious will. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 27 (5):679-692.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The commentators' responses to The Illusion of Conscious Will reveal a healthy range of opinions – pro, con, and occasionally stray. Common concerns and issues are summarized here in terms of 11 “frequently asked questions,” which often center on the theme of how the experience of conscious will supports the creation of the self as author of action





 
Whiteley, C. H. (1973). Mind In Action: An Essay In Philosophical Psychology. Oxford University Press,.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
1.6h Unconscious States




Beck, Lewis White (1966). Conscious and unconscious motives. Mind 75 (April):155-179.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 





 
Ben-Ze'ev, Aaron (1990). Conscious and unconscious states. Philosophical Studies 44:44-62.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Bernet, Rudolf (2002). Unconscious consciousness in Husserl and Freud. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 1 (3):327-351.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links) 






 
Bodkin, A. M. (1907). The subconscious factors of mental process considered in relation to thought (I). Mind 16 (62):209-228.   (Google | More links) 







 
Bodkin, A. M. (1907). The subconscious factors of mental process considered in relation to thought (II). Mind 16 (63):362-382.   (Google | More links) 







 
Brink, Louise (1918). How the concept of the unconscious is serviceable. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 15 (15):405-414.   (Google | More links) 





 
Dilman, Ilham (1959). The unconscious. Mind 68 (October):446-473.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 





 
Dretske, Fred (2006). Perception without awareness. In Tamar S. Gendler & John Hawthorne (eds.), Perceptual Experience. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 8 | Google | More links) 





 
Dunlop, Charles E. M. (2000). Searle's unconscious mind. Philosophical Psychology 13 (1):123-148.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In his book The rediscovery of the mind John Searle claims that unconscious mental states (1) have first-person "aspectual shape", but (2) that their ontology is purely third-person. He attempts to eliminate the obvious inconsistency by arguing that the aspectual shape of unconscious mental states consists in their ability to cause conscious first-person states. However, I show that this attempted solution fails insofar as it covertly acknowledges that unconscious states lack the aspectual shape required for them to play a role in psychological explanation







 
Edel, Abraham (1964). The concept of the unconscious: Some analytic preliminaries. Philosophy of Science 31 (January):18-33.   (Google | More links) 






 
Elton, Matthew (2000). Consciousness: Only at the personal level. Philosophical Explorations 3 (1):25-42.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: I claim that consciousness, just as thought or action, is only to be found at the personal level of explanation. Dennett's account is often taken to be at odds with this view, as it is seen as explicating consciousness in terms of sub-personal processes. Against this reading, and especially as it is developed by John McDowell, I argue that Dennett's work is best understood as maintaining a sharp personal/sub-personal distinction. To see this, however, we need to understand better what content ascription at the sub-personal level actually means. When we do we can see how Dennett presents both a philosophical account of consciousness and informed empirical speculation on the nature of its sub-personal underpinnings. Consciousness is a product of certain capacities that are intelligible only at the personal level, capacities that are neither present at the sub-personal level of brain mechanism nor present in 'sub-persons', e.g. some, if not all, non-human animals






 
Feldman, A. Bronson (1959). The Unconscious In History. New York: Philosophical Library.   (Google) 
 
Field, G. C.; Aveling, F. & Laird, John (1922). Is the conception of the unconscious of value in psychology? Mind 31 (124):413-442.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 






 
Finkelstein, David H. (1999). On the distinction between conscious and unconscious states of mind. American Philosophical Quarterly 36 (2):79-100.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Gardner, Sebastian (2003). The unconscious mind. In Thomas Baldwin (ed.), The Cambridge History of Philosophy 1870-1945. Cambridge University Press.   (Google) 
 
Gillett, Eric (1996). Searle and the "deep unconscious". Philosophy, Psychiatry, and Psychology 3 (3):191-200.   (Cited by 4 | Google) 
 
Gunnarsson, Logi (2005). Trapped in a secret cellar: Breaking the spell of a picture of unconscious states. Philosophical Investigations 28 (3):273-288.   (Google | More links) 





 
Haeberlin, Herman K. (1917). The concept of the unconscious. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 14 (20):543-550.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 





 
Henry Lewes, George (1877). Consciousness and unconsciousness. Mind 2 (6):156-167.   (Google | More links) 




 
Hilgard, Ernest R. (1958). Unconscious Processes and Man's Rationality. University of Illinois Press.   (Cited by 7 | Google) 
 
Krantz, Susan (1990). Brentano on 'unconscious consciousness'. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 50 (4):745-753.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Landesman, Charles (1965). Reply to professor Whallon. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 25 (March):404-405.   (Google | More links) 






 
Lee, Byeong D. (2004). Finkelstein on the difference between conscious and unconscious belief. Dialogue 43 (4):707-716.   (Google) 
 
Lehman, Craig K. (1981). Conscious and unconscious mental states. Philosophy Research Archives 1451.   (Google) 
 
Lloyd, Dan (1996). Commentary on Searle and the 'Deep Unconscious'. Philosophy, Psychiatry, and Psychology 3 (3):201-202.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Macdonald, Graham F. (1999). Folk-psychology, psychopathology, and the unconscious. Philosophical Explorations 2 (3):206-224.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: There is a 'philosophers' assumption that there is a problem with the very notion of an unconscious mental state.The paper begins by outlining how the problem is generated, and proceeds to argue that certain conditions need to be fulfilled if the unconscious is to qualify as mental. An explanation is required as to why we would ever expect these conditions to be fulfilled, and it is suggested that the Freudian concept of repression has an essential role to play in such an explanation. Notoriously this concept brings with it a further puzzle: it looks as though repression serves a purpose, and so requires an agent to execute this purpose, a repressor. Paradox is avoided only if repression is viewed in biologicalfunctional terms.The result is that the notion of the unconscious is saved from the a priori objections often levelled at it by philosophers.This still leaves considerable theoretical work to be done by psychological science





 
MacIntyre, Alasdair (2004). The Unconscious: A Conceptual Analysis (Revised Edition). New York: Routledge.   (Cited by 14 | Google) 
 
Manson, Neil Campbell (2000). 'A tumbling-ground for whimsies'? The history and contemporary role of the conscious/unconscious contrast. In Tim Crane & Sarah A. Patterson (eds.), History of the Mind-Body Problem. New York: Routledge.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Manson, Neil Campbell (2005). Consciousness-dependence, and the conscious/unconscious contrast. Philosophical Studies 126 (1):115-129.   (Google | More links) 





 
Matthews, Eric (2005). Unconscious reasons. Philosophy, Psychiatry, and Psychology 12 (1):55-57.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 






 
McKee, Patrick (1972). Non-conscious seeing. American Philosophical Quarterly 9 (October):319-326.   (Google) 
 
McLoughlin, John (1999). Unwittingly recapitulating Freud: Searle's concept of a vocabulary of the unconscious. Ratio 12 (1):34-53.   (Google | More links) 





 
Meijers, Anthonie W. M. (2000). Mental causation and Searle's impossible conception of unconscious intentionality. International Journal of Philosophical Studies 8 (2):155-170.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In my article I evaluate Searle's account of mental causation, in particular his account of the causal efficacy of unconscious intentional states. I argue that top-down causation and overdetermination are unsolved problems in Searle's philosophy of mind, despite his assurances to the contrary. I also argue that there are conflicting claims involved in his account of mental causation and his account of the unconscious. As a result, it becomes impossible to understand how unconscious intentional states can be causally efficacious. My conclusion will be that if Searle's conception of unconscious intentionality is to play a genuine role in the causal explanation of human action, it needs to be rethought







 
Pierce, A. H. (1906). Should we still retain the expression `unconscious cerebration' to designate certain processes connected with mental life? Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods 3 (23):626-630.   (Google | More links) 





 
Schwankl, Peter (1959). Attempt to understand a common vague conception of the unconscious. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 19 (March):380-390.   (Google | More links) 





 
Searle, John R. (1989). Consciousness, unconsciousness, and intentionality. Philosophical Topics 17 (1):193-209.   (Cited by 32 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 






 
Searle, John R. (1994). The connection principle and the ontology of the unconscious: A reply to Fodor and Lepore. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 54 (4):847-55.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Vesey, Godfrey N. A. (1960). Unconscious perception, part II. Aristotelian Society 67:67-78.   (Google) 
 
Vollmer, Fred (1993). Intentional action and unconscious reasons. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour 23 (3):315-326.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 




 
Weintraub, Ruth (1987). Unconscious mental states. Philosophical Quarterly 37 (October):423-32.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Zemach, Eddy (1986). Unconscious Mind or Conscious Minds? Midwest Studies in Philosophy 10:121-149.   (Google) 
 
1.6i Collective Consciousness




1.6j Aspects of Consciousness, Misc




Balog, Katalin (2007). Comments on Ned Block's target article “Consciousness, accessibility, and the mesh between psychology and neuroscience”. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 30 (4):499-500.   (Google)
Abstract: Block argues that relevant data in psychology and neuroscience shows that access consciousness is not constitutively necessary for phenomenality. However, a phenomenal state can be access conscious in two radically different ways. Its content can be access conscious, or its phenomenality can be access conscious. I’ll argue that while Block’s thesis is right when it is formulated in terms of the first notion of access consciousness, there is an alternative hypothesis about the relationship between phenomenality and access in terms of the second notion that is not touched by Block’s argument.
 
1.7 Qualia




Allen, Robert F. (online). The subject is qualia: Paronyms and temporary identity.   (Google) 
 
Amoroso, Richard L. (2004). Application of double-cusp catastrophe theory to the physical evolution of qualia: Implications for paradigm shift in medicine and psychology. Anticipative and Predictive Models in Systems Science 1 (1):19-26.   (Google) 
 
Armstrong, David M. (1996). Qualia ain't in the head. Psyche 2:31--4.   (Google) 
 
Atlas, Jay David, Qualia, consciousness, and memory: Dennett (2005), Rosenthal (2002), Ledoux (2002), and Libet (2004).   (Google)
Abstract: In his recent (2005) book "Sweet Dreams: philosophical obstacles to a science of consciousness," Dennett renews his attack on a philosophical notion of qualia, the success of which attack is required if his brand of Functionalism is to survive. He also articulates once again what he takes to be essential to his notion of consciousness. I shall argue that his new, central argument against the philosophical concept of qualia fails. In passing I point out a difficulty that David Rosenthal's "higher-order thought" theory of consciousness also faces in accounting for qualia. I then contrast Dennett's newest account of consciousness with interestingly different conceptions by contemporary neuro-scientists, and I suggest that philosophers should take the recent suggestions by neuro-scientists more seriously as a subject for philosophical investigation
 
Bachrach, Jay E. (1990). Qualia and theory reduction: A criticism of Paul Churchland. Iyyun 281.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Bailey, Andrew R. (2007). Qualia and the argument from illusion: A defence of figment. Acta Analytica 22 (2).   (Google)
Abstract: This paper resurrects two discredited ideas in the philosophy of mind. The first: the idea that perceptual illusion might have something metaphysically significant to tell us about the nature of phenomenal consciousness. The second: that the colours and other qualities that ‘fill’ our sensory fields are occurrent properties (rather than representations of properties) that are, nevertheless, to be distinguished from the ‘objective’ properties of things in the external world. Theories of consciousness must recognize the existence of what Daniel Dennett mockingly labels ‘figment,’ but this result—though metaphysically and epistemologically significant—is not incompatible with either physicalism or naturalized semantics
 
Bailey, Andrew R. (2005). What is it like to see a bat? A critique of Dretske's representationalist theory of qualia. Disputatio 1 (18).   (Google) 
 
Beaton, Michael (2009). Qualia and Introspection. Journal of Consciousness Studies 16 (5):88-110.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The claim that behaviourally undetectable inverted spectra are possible has been endorsed by many physicalists. I explain why this starting point rules out standard forms of scientific explanation for qualia. The modern ‘phenomenal concept strategy’ is an updated way of defending problematic intuitions like these, but I show that it cannot help to recover standard scientific explanation. I argue that Chalmers is right: we should accept the falsity of physicalism if we accept this problematic starting point. I further argue that accepting this starting point amounts to at least implicitly endorsing certain theoretical claims about the nature of introspection. I therefore suggest that we allow ourselves to be guided, in our quest to understand qualia, by whatever independently plausible theories of introspection we have. I propose that we adopt a more moderate definition of qualia, as those introspectible properties which cannot be fully specified simply by specifying the non-controversially introspectible ‘propositional attitude’ mental states (including seeing x, experiencing x, and so on, where x is a specification of a potentially public state of affairs). Qualia thus defined may well fit plausible, naturalisable accounts of introspection. If so, such accounts have the potential to explain, rather than explain away, the problematic intuitions discussed earlier; an approach that should allow integration of our understanding of qualia with the rest of science.





 
Bigelow, John C. & Pargetter, Robert (1990). Acquaintance with qualia. Theoria 61 (3):129-147.   (Cited by 16 | Annotation | Google)




  
Bigelow, John C. & Pargetter, Robert (2006). Re-acquaintance with qualia. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 84 (3):353 – 378.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Frank Jackson argued, in an astronomically frequently cited paper on 'Epiphenomenal qualia'[Jackson 1982 that materialism must be mistaken. His argument is called the knowledge argument. Over the years since he published that paper, he gradually came to the conviction that the conclusion of the knowledge argument must be mistaken. Yet he long remained totally unconvinced by any of the very numerous published attempts to explain where his knowledge argument had gone astray. Eventually, Jackson did publish a diagnosis of the reasons why, he now thinks, his knowledge argument against materialism fails to prove the falsity of materialism [Jackson 2005. He argues that you can block the knowledge argument against materialism - but only if you tie yourself to a dubious doctrine called representationalism. We argue that the knowledge argument fails as a refutation of either representational or nonrepresentational materialism. It does, however, furnish both materialists and dualists with a successful argument for the existence of distinctively first-person modes of acquaintance with mental states. Jackson's argument does not refute materialism: but it does bring to the surface significant features of thought and experience, which many dualists have sensed, and most materialists have missed







 
Billock, Vincent A. & Tsou, Brian H. (2004). Color, qualia, and psychophysical constraints on equivalence of color experience. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 27 (1):164-165.   (Google)
Abstract: It has been suggested that difficult-to-quantify differences in visual processing may prevent researchers from equating the color experience of different observers. However, spectral locations of unique hues are remarkably invariant with respect to everything other than gross differences in preretinal and photoreceptor absorptions. This suggests a stereotyping of neural color processing and leads us to posit that minor differences in observer neurophysiology may be irrelevant to color experience
 
Braddon-Mitchell, David (2003). Qualia and analytical conditionals. Journal of Philosophy 100 (3):111-135.   (Cited by 12 | Google | More links) 




 
Buck, R. (1993). What is this thing called subjective experience? Reflections on the neuropsychology of qualia. Neuropsychology 7:490-99.   (Cited by 16 | Google) 
 
Burge, Tyler (2003). Qualia and intentional content: Reply to Block. In Martin Hahn & B. Ramberg (eds.), Reflections and Replies: Essays on the Philosophy of Tyler Burge. MIT Press.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Byrne, Alex & Tye, Michael (2006). Qualia ain't in the head. Noûs 40 (2):241-255.   (Cited by 9 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Qualia internalism is the thesis that qualia are intrinsic to their subjects: the experiences of intrinsic duplicates (in the same or different metaphysically possible worlds) have the same qualia. Content externalism is the thesis that mental representation is an extrinsic matter, partly depending on what happens outside the head.1 Intentionalism (or representationalism) comes in strong and weak forms. In its weakest formulation, it is the thesis that representationally identical experiences of subjects (in the same or different metaphysically possible worlds) have the same qualia.2








 
Casati, Roberto (2003). Qualia domesticated. In Amita Chatterjee (ed.), Perspectives on Consciousness. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.   (Google | More links) 






 
Cavedon-Taylor, Dan (2009). Still epiphenomenal qualia: Response to Muller. Philosophia 37 (1):105-107.   (Google)
Abstract: Hans Muller has recently attempted to show that Frank Jackson cannot assert the existence of qualia without thereby falsifying himself on the matter of such mental states being epiphenomenal with respect to the physical world. I argue that Muller misunderstands the commitments of qualia epiphenomenalism and that, as a result, his arguments against Jackson do not go through
 
Chalmers, David J. (1993). Self-ascription without qualia: A case-study. Behavioral And Brain Sciences 16 (1):35-36.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In Section 5 of his interesting article, Goldman suggests that the consideration of imaginary cases can be valuable in the analysis of our psychological concepts. In particular, he argues that we can imagine a system that is isomorphic to us under any functional description, but which lacks qualitative mental states, such as pains and color sensations. Whether or not such a being is empirically possible, it certainly seems to be logically possible, or conceptually coherent. Goldman argues from this possibility to the conclusion that our concepts of qualitative mental states cannot be analyzed entirely in functional terms






 
Churchland, Paul M. & Churchland, Patricia Smith (1981). Functionalism, qualia, and intentionality. Philosophical Topics 12 (1):121-145.   (Google) 
 
Churchland, Paul M. (1989). Knowing qualia: A reply to Jackson. In A Neurocomputational Perspective. MIT Press.   (Cited by 63 | Annotation | Google)




  
Churchland, Paul M. (1985). Reduction, qualia and the direct introspection of brain states. Journal of Philosophy 82 (January):8-28.   (Cited by 110 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Clark, Austen (2010). Color, qualia, and attention : A non-standard interpretation. In Jonathan Cohen & Mohan Matthen (eds.), Color Ontology and Color Science. Mit Press.   (Google) 
 
Cohen, Jonathan (2001). Whither visual representations? Whither qualia? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24 (5):980-981.   (Google)
Abstract: This commentary makes two rejoinders to O'Regan & Noë. It clarifies the status of visual representations in their account, and argues that their explanation of the (according to them, illusory) appeal of qualia is unsatisfying
 
Cole, David J. (1994). Thought and qualia. Minds and Machines 4 (3):283-302.   (Google | More links) 






 
Crooks, Mark (2008). The Churchlands' war on qualia. In Edmond Wright (ed.), The Case For Qualia. The MIT Press.   (Google)
Abstract: The systematic phenomenology-denial within the works of Paul and Patricia Churchland is critiqued as to its coherence with the known elelmentary physics and physiology of perception. Paul Churchland misidentifies "qualia" with psychology's sensorimotor schemas, while Patricia Churchland illicitly propounds the intertheoretic identities of logical empiricism while rejecting the premises upon which those identities are based. Their analogies from such arguments to an identity of mind and brain thus have no inductive probability.
 
de Leon, David (ms). The qualities of qualia.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This essay is a defence of the traditional notion of qualia - as properties of consciousness that are ineffable, intrinsic, private and immediately apprehensible - against the eliminative attempts of Daniel Dennett in the influential article "Quining Qualia." It is suggested that a thorough exploration of the concept is an appropriate starting point for future explanations of qualia, and the essay ends with some possible explanations of the four traditional properties





 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1991). "Epiphenomenal" qualia? In Consciousness Explained. Little, Brown.   (Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Doesburg, Sam M. & Ward, Lawrence M. (2007). Corticothalamic necessity, qualia, and consciousness. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 30 (1):90-91.   (Google)
Abstract: The centrencephalic theory of consciousness cannot yet account for some evidence from both brain damaged and normally functioning humans that strongly implicates thalamocortical activity as essential for consciousness. Moreover, the behavioral indexes used by Merker to implicate consciousness need more development, as, besides being somewhat vague, they lead to some apparent contradictions in the attribution of consciousness. (Published Online May 1 2007)
 
Dorsch, Fabian, Conceptual qualia and communication.   (Google)
Abstract: The claim that consciousness is propositional has be widely debated in the past. For instance, it has been discussed whether consciousness is always propositional, whether all propositional consciousness is linguistic, whether propositional consciousness is always articulated, or whether there can be non-articulated propositions. In contrast, the question of whether propositions are conscious has not very often been the focus of attention
 
Dretske, Fred (1996). Phenomenal externalism, or if meanings ain't in the head, where are qualia? Philosophical Issues 7:143-158.   (Cited by 19 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Flohr, Hans (1992). Qualia and brain processes. In Ansgar Beckermann, Hans Flohr & Jaegwon Kim (eds.), Emergence or Reduction? Prospects for Nonreductive Physicalism. De Gruyter.   (Cited by 14 | Google) 
 
Forster, Malcolm (1991). Preconditions of predication: From qualia to quantum mechanics. Topoi 10 (1).   (Google)
Abstract:   Although in every inductive inference, an act of invention is requisite, the act soon slips out of notice. Although we bind together facts by superinducing upon them a new Conception, this Conception, once introduced and applied, is looked upon as inseparably connected with the facts, and necessarily implied in them. Having once had the phenomena bound together in their minds in virtue of the Conception men can no longer easily restore them back to the detached and incoherent condition in which they were before they were thus combined. The pearls once strung, they seem to form a chain by their nature. Induction has given them unity which it is so far from costing us an effort to preserve, that it requires an effort to imagine it dissolved — William Whewell, 1858. (Quoted from Butts (ed.), 1989, p. 143)
 
Francescotti, Robert M. (2000). Introspection and qualia: A defense of infallibility. Communication and Cognition 33 (3-4):161-173.   (Google) 
 
Fürst, Martina (2004). Qualia and phenomenal concepts as basis of the knowledge argument. Acta Analytica 19 (32):143-152.   (Google)
Abstract: The central attempt of this paper is to explain the underlying intuitions of Frank Jackson’s “Knowledge Argument” that the epistemic gap between phenomenal knowledge and physical knowledge points towards a corresponding ontological gap. The first step of my analysis is the claim that qualia are epistemically special because the acquisition of the phenomenal concept of a quale x requires the experience of x. Arguing what is so special about phenomenal concepts and pointing at the inherence-relation with the qualia they pick out, I give compelling reasons for the existence of ontologically distinct entities. Finally I conclude that phenomenal knowledge is caused by phenomenal properties and the instantiation of these properties is a specific phenomenal fact, which can not be mediated by any form of descriptive information. So it will be shown that phenomenal knowledge must count as the possession of very special information necessarily couched in subjective, phenomenal conceptions
 
Gadenne, Volker (2006). In defence of qualia-epiphenomenalism. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (1-2):101-114.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Epiphenomenalism has been criticized with several objections. It has been argued that epiphenomenalism is incompatible with the alleged causal relevance of mental states, and that it renders knowledge of our own conscious states impossible. In this article, it is demonstrated that qualia-epiphenomenalism follows from some well- founded assumptions, and that it meets the cited objections. Though not free from difficulties, it is at least superior to its main competitors, namely, physicalism and interactionism






 
Gertler, Brie (2006). Consciousness and Qualia Cannot Be Reduced. In Robert J. Stainton (ed.), Contemporary Debates in Cognitive Science (Contemporary Debates in Philosophy). Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Globus, Gordon G. (1998). Self, cognition, qualia, and world in quantum brain dynamics. Journal of Consciousness Studies 5 (1):34-52.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Goguen, J. (2004). Musical qualia, context, time and emotion. Journal of Consciousness Studies 11 (3-4):117-147.   (Cited by 7 | Google | More links) 









 
Greenberg, L. S. (2003). Review of “emotions, qualia and consciousness” by Alfred kaszniak (ed.). Consciousness and Emotion 4 (2):327-333.   (Google) 
 
Gregory, Richard L. (1996). What do qualia do? Perception 25:377-79.   (Cited by 8 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 







 
Gustafson, Donald F. (1998). Pain, qualia, and the explanatory gap. Philosophical Psychology 11 (3):371-387.   (Cited by 6 | Google)
Abstract: This paper investigates the status of the purported explanatory gap between pain phenomena and natural science, when the “gap” is thought to exist due to the special properties of experience designated by “qualia” or “the pain quale” in the case of pain experiences. The paper questions the existence of such a property in the case of pain by: (1) looking at the history of the conception of pain; (2) raising questions from empirical research and theory in the psychology of pain; (3) considering evidence from the neurophysiological systems of pain; (4) investigating the possible biological role or roles of pain; and (5) considering methodological questions of the comparable status of the results of the sciences of pain in contrast to certain intuitions underpinning “the explanatory gap” in the case of pain. Skepticism concerning the crucial underlying intuitions seems justified by these considerations
 
Harman, Gilbert (1996). Qualia and color concepts. Philosophical Issues 7:75-79.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 





 
Hawthorne, John (2006). Dancing qualia and direct reference. In Torin Alter & Sven Walter (eds.), Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Hawthorne, John (2007). Direct reference and dancing qualia. In Torin Alter & Sven Walter (eds.), Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Hilbert, David, Qualia.   (Google)
Abstract: Perception and thought are often, although not exclusively, concerned with information about the world. In the case of perceiving though, unlike thinking, it is widely believed that there is an additional element involved, a subjective feeling or, as it is often put, something that it is like to be perceiving. Qualia are these characteristic feelings that accompany perceiving. One motivation for the idea that we experience qualia is that there is a clear difference between seeing a red tomato and thinking that a tomato is red and that the difference has to do with some extra element present in the case of seeing that is absent in the case of thinking. Philosophical attempts to understand qualia and their place in the world have played a central role in recent debates about the nature of mind and its place in the world. Before getting to those debates, we will take a more detailed look at the distinction between the content of perceptual experiences,what they tell us about the world, and their qualitative or phenomenal character, what it is like to experience them
 
Hill, Christopher S. (online). Visual awareness and visual qualia.   (Google)
Abstract: Department of Philosophy Brown University Providence, RI 02915
 
Hodgson, David (2002). Three tricks of consciousness: Qualia, chunking and selection. Journal of Consciousness Studies 9 (12):65-88.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: DAVID HODGSON Abstract: This article supports the proposition that, if a judgment about the aesthetic merits of an artistic object can take into account and thereby be influenced by the particular quality of the object, through gestalt experiences evoked by the object, then we have free will. It argues that it is probable that such a judgment can indeed take into account and be influenced by the particular quality of the object through gestalt experiences evoked by it, so as to make it probable that we do have free will. The proposition is supported by reference to two basic tricks apparently involved in conscious processes, which I call the qualia trick and the chunking trick; and it is suggested that these tricks make possible and indeed probable the existence of a third trick, which I call the selection trick





 
Hodes, Greg P. (2005). What would it "be like" to solve the hard problem?: Cognition, consciousness, and qualia zombies. Neuroquantology 3 (1):43-58.   (Google) 
 
Holt, Jason (1999). Blindsight in debates about qualia. Journal of Consciousness Studies 6 (5):54-71.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Holman, Emmett L. (1988). Qualia, Kripkean arguments, and subjectivity. Philosophy Research Archives 13:411-29.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Honderich, Ted (1992). Seeing qualia and positing the world. In A. Phillips Griffiths (ed.), A. J. Ayer: Memorial Essays. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 3 | Google) 
 
Jackson, Frank (1982). Epiphenomenal qualia. Philosophical Quarterly 32 (April):127-136.   (Cited by 566 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 






















 
John, James (2010). Against qualia theory. Philosophical Studies 147 (3).   (Google)
Abstract: Representational theorists identify experiences’ phenomenal properties with their representational properties. Qualia theorists reject this identity, insisting that experiences’ phenomenal properties can come apart from and completely outrun their representational properties. Qualia theorists account for phenomenal properties in terms of “qualia,” intrinsic mental properties they allege experiences to instantiate. The debate between representational theorists and qualia theorists has focused on whether phenomenal properties really can come apart from and completely outrun representational properties. As a result, qualia theorists have failed (1) to explain how experiences owe their phenomenal properties to their instantiation of qualia and (2) to clarify the nature of subjects’ epistemic access to qualia. I survey qualia theorists’ options for dealing with each issue and find them all wanting
 
Johnsen, Bredo C. (1997). Dennett on qualia and consciousness: A critique. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 27 (1):47-82.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Kalat, James W. (2002). Identism without objective qualia: Commentary on Crooks. Journal of Mind and Behavior 23 (3):233-238.   (Google) 
 
Kim, Jaegwon (1996). Dretske's qualia externalism. Philosophical Issues 7:159-165.   (Google | More links) 





 
Kind, Amy (2008). How to believe in qualia. In Edmond Wright (ed.), The Case for Qualia. The Mit Press.   (Google)
Abstract: forthcoming in The Case for Qualia, ed. by Edmond Wright , MIT Press (expected 2008)
 
Kiverstein, Julian (2008). Wittgenstein, qualia, and the autonomy of grammar. In David K. Levy & Edoardo Zamuner (eds.), Wittgenstein's Enduring Arguments. Routledge.   (Google) 
 
Kurthen, Martin (1990). Qualia, sensa und absolute prozesse. Journal for General Philosophy of Science 21 (1).   (Google) 
 
Lalor, Brendan J. (1999). Intentionality and qualia. Synthese 121 (3):249-290.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Langsam, Harold (2000). Experiences, thoughts, and qualia. Philosophical Studies 99 (3):269-295.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 





 
Levine, Joseph (1997). Are qualia just representations? Mind and Language 12:101-13.   (Google) 
 
Levin, Yakir (2004). Criterial semantics and qualia. Facta Philosophica 6 (1):57-76.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Levine, Joseph (1983). Materialism and qualia: The explanatory gap. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 64 (October):354-61.   (Cited by 235 | Annotation | Google)




  
Loar, Brian (2003). Qualia, properties, modality. Philosophical Issues 1 (1):113-29.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 





 
Loar, Brian (2003). Transparent experience and the availability of qualia. In Quentin Smith & Aleksandar Jokic (eds.), Consciousness: New Philosophical Perspectives. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 17 | Google) 
 
Lockwood, Michael (2003). Consciousness and the quantum world: Putting qualia on the map. In Quentin Smith & Aleksandar Jokic (eds.), Consciousness: New Philosophical Perspectives. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Loui, Michael C. (1994). Against qualia: Our direct perception of physical reality. In European Review of Philosophy, Volume 1: Philosophy of Mind. Stanford: CSLI Publications.   (Google) 
 
L., S. (2003). Review of “emotions, qualia and consciousness” by Alfred kaszniak (ed.). Consciousness and Emotion 4 (2):327-333.   (Google) 
 
Lycan, William G. (2006). Consciousness and Qualia Can Be Reduced. In Robert J. Stainton (ed.), Contemporary Debates in Cognitive Science (Contemporary Debates in Philosophy). Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Lycan, William G. (1998). In defense of the representational theory of qualia. Philosophical Perspectives 12:479-87.   (Google) 
 
Lycan, William G. (1998). In defense of the representational theory of qualia (replies to Neander, Rey, and tye). Philosophical Perspectives 12.   (Google) 
 
Mandik, Pete (1999). Qualia, space, and control. Philosophical Psychology 12 (1):47-60.   (Cited by 15 | Google | More links)
Abstract: According to representionalists, qualia-the introspectible properties of sensory experience-are exhausted by the representational contents of experience. Representationalists typically advocate an informational psychosemantics whereby a brain state represents one of its causal antecedents in evolutionarily determined optimal circumstances. I argue that such a psychosemantics may not apply to certain aspects of our experience, namely, our experience of space in vision, hearing, and touch. I offer that these cases can be handled by supplementing informational psychosemantics with a procedural psychosemantics whereby a representation is about its effects instead of its causes. I discuss conceptual and empirical points that favor a procedural representationalism for our experience of space










 
Mandler, George (2005). The consciousness continuum: From "qualia" to "free will". Psychological Research/Psychologische Forschung. Vol 69 (5-6):330-337.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Maund, Barry (2008). A defense of qualia in the strong sense. In Edmond Wright (ed.), The Case for Qualia. The Mit Press.   (Google) 
 
McCauley, Robert N. (1993). Why the blind can't lead the blind: Dennett on the blind spot, blindsight, and sensory qualia. Consciousness and Cognition 2:155-64.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google)




  
McIntyre, Ronald (1999). Naturalizing phenomenology? Dretske on qualia. In Ronald McIntyre (ed.), Naturalizing Phenomenology. Stanford: Stanford University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: in Naturalizing Phenomenology: Contemporary Phenomenology and Cognitive Science, ed. by Jean Petitot et al. (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999), pp. 429-439
 
McKinsey, Michael (2005). A refutation of qualia physicalism. In Michael O'Rourke & Corey G. Washington (eds.), Situating Semantics: Essays on the Philosophy of John Perry. MIT Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Medina, Jeffrey A. (2002). What it's like and why: Subjective qualia explained as objective phenomena. [Journal (on-Line/Unpaginated)] 12:12.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Notably spurred into the philosophical forefront by Thomas Nagel's 'What Is It Like To Be a Bat?' decades ago, and since maintained by a number of advocates of dualism since that critical publication, is the assertion that our inability to know 'what it's like' to be someone or something else is inexplicable given physicalism. Contrary to this well-known and central objection, I find that a consistent and exhaustive physicalism is readily conceivable. I develop one such theory and demonstrate that not only is it consistent with the private and varied nature of subjective experience, it, in fact, entails it






 
Miguens, Sofia (2002). Qualia or non epistemic perception: D. Dennett's and F. Dretske's representational theories of consciousness. Agora 21 (2):193-208.   (Google) 
 
Mogi, Ken (online). Creativity and the neural basis of qualia.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In what computational aspect is the brain different from the computer? In what objective measures can the brain said to be “creative”? These are the fundamental questions that concerns the neural basis of human mental activity. Here we discuss several important aspects of the essential computational ingredients of human mind in order to understand the “creative” process going on in the brain. One of the key concepts is the nature of the source of "externality" that adds new ingredients to the system and its output. We argue that in addition to information input and stochasticity, we need to consider a third possibility, namely "dynamics-embedded externality". We discuss how the neural origin of the subjective sensory qualities (qualia) is related to this aspect of creativity. The invariance of qualia under a certain class of transformation, and the mapping of discrete,





 
Mogi, Ken (1997). Qualia and the brain. Nikkei Science.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: _The concept of qualia describes the unique properties that_ _accompany our senses. It is an essential concept when we try to_ _understand the principle that bridges the neural firings in our_ _brain and our perception. The idea of qualia is also of crucial_ _importance when we try to study the functions of the brain from_ _an objective point of view. Qualia must be part of the_ _mathematical formulation of information we use to understand_ _the function of the brain._





 
Mogi, Ken (1999). Supervenience and qualia. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22 (5):844-845.   (Google)
Abstract: The privileged position of neural activity in biological neuroscience might be justified on the grounds of the nonlinear and all-or-none character of neural firing. To justify the neuron doctrine in cognitive neuroscience and make it both plausible and radical, we must consider the supervenience of elementary mental properties such as qualia on neural activity
 
Monaco, Francesco; Mula, Marco & Cavanna, Andrea E. (2005). Consciousness, epilepsy, and emotional qualia. Epilepsy and Behavior 7 (2):150-160.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Muller, Hans (2008). Why qualia are not epiphenomenal. Ratio 21 (1):85–90.   (Google | More links) 




 
Musacchio, J. M. (2005). Why do qualia and the mind seem nonphysical? Synthese 147 (3):425-460.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In this article, I discuss several of the factors that jeopardize our understanding of the nature of qualitative experiences and the mind. I incorporate the view from neuroscience to clarify the na






 
Newton, Natika (1991). Consciousness, qualia, and re-entrant signaling. Behavior and Philosophy 19 (1):21-41.   (Google) 
 
Nicholson, Mr D. M. (ms). From a flaw in the knowledge argument to a physicalist account of qualia.   (Google)
Abstract: The Knowledge argument based on the grey Mary thought experiment cannot be claimed as a basis for rejecting physicalism. First, because it is flawed, being so formulated as to predetermine the outcome of the thought experiment in favour of a refutation of physicalism. Second, because, once this is recognised, it becomes clear that there is one - and only one - account of the qualia-physical relationship that will permit physicalism to survive the thought experiment itself. It is suggested that the position in question is worthy of further consideration as a reasonable candidate theory for a physicalist account of qualia
 
Nida-Rumelin, Martine (online). Qualia: The Knowledge Argument. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.   (Cited by 5 | Google) 
 
Nikolinakos, Drakon (2000). Dennett on qualia: The case of pain, smell and taste. Philosophical Psychology 13 (4):505 – 522.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Dennett has maintained that a careful examination of our intuitive notion of qualia reveals that it is a confused notion, that it is advisable to accept that experience does not have the properties designated by it and that it is best to eliminate it. Because most scientists share this notion of qualia, the major line of attack of his project becomes that of raising objections against the ability of science to answer some basic questions about qualia. I try to show that science appeals to qualia and that it in fact adheres to a notion of qualia different from the one that Dennett has attributed to it. It is argued that qualia are amenable to scientific investigation and that this is the reason why science contributes toward the clarification of the notion of qualia. I also try to show that Dennett's skepticism about the abilities of science in answering questions posited by one of his thought experiments is unwarranted. I conclude that we need not accept Dennett's eliminativism about qualia







 
Northoff, Georg (2003). Qualia and the ventral prefrontal cortical function 'neurophenomenological' hypothesis. Journal of Consciousness Studies 10 (8):14-48.   (Google) 
 
Northoff, Georg (1995). Qualia im knotenpunkt zwischen Leib und seele: „Argumentatives“ dilemma in der gegenwärtigen diskussion über die subjektivität mentaler zustände. Journal for General Philosophy of Science 26 (2).   (Google) 
 
O'Dea, John (ms). A higher-order, dispositional theory of qualia.   (Google) 
 
Pacherie, Elisabeth (1999). Qualia and representations. In Denis Fisette (ed.), Consciousness and Intentionality: Models and Modalities of Attribution.   (Google | More links) 






 
Palmer, Stephen E. (1999). On qualia, relations, and structure in color experience. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22 (6):976-985.   (Google)
Abstract: In this Response, I defend the notion of intrinsic qualities of experience, discuss the distinction between relational experience and relational structure, clarify the difference between narrow and broad interpretations of color experience, argue against externalist approaches to color experience, defend the concept of isomorphism as a limitation in understanding color experiences, examine critiques of the color machine and color room arguments, and counter objections to within-subject experiments based on memory limitations
 
Park, Desiree (1992). Ayerian 'qualia' and the empiricist heritage. In The Philosophy of A Jayer. Peru: Open Court.   (Google) 
 
Ramachandran, Vilayanur S. & Hirstein, William (1998). Three laws of qualia: What neurology tells us about the biological functions of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 4 (4-5):429-57.   (Cited by 40 | Google | More links) 





 
Reynaert, Peter (2001). A phenomenology for qualia and naturalizing embodiment. Communication and Cognition 34 (1-2):139-154.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Robinson, William S. (1994). Orwell, stalin, and determinate qualia. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 75 (2):151-64.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google)




  
Robbins, Stephen E. (2007). Time, form and the limits of qualia. Journal of Mind and Behavior 28 (1):19-43.   (Google) 
 
Ross, P. (2001). Qualia and the senses. Philosophical Quarterly 51 (205):495-511.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 










 
Ryder, Dan (online). Explaining the "inhereness" of qualia representationally: Why we seem to have a visual field.   (Google) 
 
Schweizer, Paul (1994). Intentionality, qualia, and mind/brain identity. Minds and Machines 4 (3):259-82.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 





 
Schröder, Jürgen (1997). Qualia und physikalismus. Journal for General Philosophy of Science 28 (1).   (Google)
Abstract: Qualia and Physicalism. It is assumed that the following three relations exhaust the possibilities for a physicalist account of qualia: 1. determination, 2. identity, 3. realization. The first relation is immediately rejected because it does not exclude property dualism. The second faces the problem that it is probably impossible to discriminate empirically between the identity thesis and the epiphenomenalist position. The third cannot handle qualia adequately, for qualia are not functional properties and the realization relation is only plausible as a relation between physical realizers and functional properties. Finally, if one attempts to replace multiple realization by multiple identities it is shown that the notion of multiple property identities is unintelligible. The upshot is that if these three relations exhaust the possibilities of a physicalist construal of qualia then physicalism is wrong
 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1984). Churchland on reduction, qualia, and introspection. Philosophy of Science Association 1984.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Singer, M. (2001). Unbounded Consciousness: Qualia, Mind, and Self. Free Association Books.   (Google) 
 
Smith, Renée (2005). The transparency of qualia and the nature of introspection. Philosophical Writings 29:21-44.   (Google) 
 
Soldati, Gianfranco & Dorsch, Fabian, Conceptual qualia and communication.   (Google)
Abstract: The claim that consciousness is propositional has be widely debated in the past. For instance, it has been discussed whether consciousness is always propositional, whether all propositional consciousness is linguistic, whether propositional consciousness is always articulated, or whether there can be non-articulated propositions. In contrast, the question of whether propositions are conscious has not very often been the focus of attention
 
Staudacher, Alexander (2006). Epistemological challenges to qualia-epiphenomenalism. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (1-2):153-175.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: One of the strongest objections to epiphenomenalism is that it precludes any kind of knowledge of qualia, since empirical knowledge has to include a causal relationship between the respective belief and the object of knowledge. It is argued that this objection works only if the causal relationship is understood in a very specific sense (as a 'direct' causal relationship). Epiphenomenalism can, however, live well with other kinds of causal relationships ('indirect' causal relationships) or even with a reliability account of knowledge which does not invoke causation at all. Michael Pauen has argued extensively (this volume of Journal of Consciousness Studies), however, that this line of defence doesn't work because it presupposes the existence of psychophysical laws connecting qualia with physical phenomena which cannot be established under epiphenomenalist presuppositions. It is argued that Pauen's arguments lead to sceptical consequences which threaten not only interactionist alternatives to epiphenomenalism but finally his own account





 
Stjernberg, Fredrik (online). Not so epiphenomenal qualia.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Stubenberg, Leopold (1998). Consciousness and Qualia. John Benjamins.   (Cited by 73 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Consciousness and Qualia is a philosophical study of qualitative consciousness, characteristic examples of which are pains, experienced colors, sounds, etc.







 
Stubenberg, Leopold (1996). The place of qualia in the world of science. In Stuart R. Hameroff, Alfred W. Kaszniak & A. C. Scott (eds.), Toward a Science of Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Cited by 7 | Google) 
 
Sweis, Khaldoun A. (2009). Consciousness or qualia: What a conversation from leading thinkers in the field may sound like. Think 8 (23):45-53.   (Google) 
 
Thomas, Michael S. C. & Atkinson, Anthony P. (1999). Quantities of qualia. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22 (1):169-170.   (Google)
Abstract: We address two points in this commentary. First, we question the extent to which O'Brien & Opie have established that the classical approach is unable to support a viable vehicle theory of consciousness. Second, assuming that connectionism does have the resources to support a vehicle theory, we explore how the activity of the units of a PDP network might sum together to form phenomenal experience (PE)
 
Tye, Michael (2007). New troubles for the qualia freak. In Brian P. McLaughlin & Jonathan D. Cohen (eds.), Contemporary Debates in Philosophy of Mind. Blackwell Pub..   (Google)
Abstract: The phenomenal character of an experience is what it is like subjectively to undergo the experience. Experiences vary in their phenomenal character, in what it is like to un- dergo them. Think, for example of the subjective differences between feeling a burning pain in a toe, experiencing an itch in an arm, smelling rotten eggs, tasting Marmite, having a visual experience of bright purple, running one’s fingers over rough sandpaper, feeling hungry, experiencing anger, feeling elated. Insofar as what it is like to undergo each of these experiences is different, their phenomenal character is different
 
Tye, Michael (2002). Visual qualia and visual content revisited. In David J. Chalmers (ed.), Philosophy of Mind: Classical and Contemporary Readings. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 8 | Google)
Abstract: Experiences vary widely. For example, I run my fingers over sandpaper, smell a skunk, feel a sharp pain in my finger, seem to see bright purple, become extremely angry. In each of these cases, I am the subject of a mental state with a very distinctive subjective character. There is something it is _like_ for me to undergo each state, some phenomenology that it has. Philoso- phers often use the term 'qualia' to refer to the introspectively accessible properties of experiences that characterize what it is like to have them. In this standard, broad sense of the term, it is very difficult to deny that there are qualia. There is another, more restricted use of the term
 
Tye, Michael (1992). Visual qualia and visual content. In Tim Crane (ed.), The Contents of Experience. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 39 | Google) 
 
Unknown, Unknown (online). Qualia realism.   (Google)
Abstract: Philosophical Studies 104: 143-162 (2001)
 
Vadén, Tere (2001). Qualifying qualia through the skyhook test. Inquiry 44 (2):149 – 169.   (Google)
Abstract: If we are to preserve qualia, one possibility is to take the current academic, philosophical, and theoretical notion less seriously and current natural science and some pre-theoretical intuitions about qualia more seriously. Dennett (1997) is instrumental in showing how ideas of the intrinsicalness and privacy of qualia are misguided and those of ineffability and immediacy misinterpreted. However, by combining ideas of non-mechanicalness used in contemporary natural science with the pre-theoretical idea that qualia are special because they are unique, we get a notion of qualia that is acceptable to naturalistic philosophy. The notion of unique qualia is not opposed to the idea that some of the characterizations of qualia have to be qualified. It is the folk-philosophical, academic, notions of theoreticity and conceptuality that have to be modified
 
Voltolini, Alberto, Wittgensteinian watered-down qualia.   (Google)
Abstract: In this paper I want to hold that Wittgenstein’s later position on qualitative states, which sees them as triplets made out of three necessary components - stimulus, qualitative element and manifestability - allows for supervenience of such states over physical ones. Insofar as this is the case, such a position is more akin to naturalism that the one that has been recently defended by Kim, who allows for merely partial supervenience of qualia over physical states. Moreover, Wittgenstein’s conception stems out of a critical refinement of ideas he held in the mid-Thirties and that were developed by Schlick. Insofar as Schlick’s development is the recognized ancestor of Kim’s latest stance on qualia, one may take Wittgenstein’s later theses on qualia as a possible refinement in a naturalist direction of Kim’s own conception
 
Wager, A. (1999). The extra qualia problem: Synaesthesia and representationism. Philosophical Psychology 12 (3):263-281.   (Cited by 9 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Representationism is the view that the phenomenal character of an experience supervenes on its representational content. Synaesthesia is a condition in which the phenomenal character of the experience produced in a subject by stimulation of one sensory modality contains elements characteristic of a second, unstimulated sensory modality. After reviewing some of the recent psychological literature on synaesthesia and one of the leading versions of representationism, I argue that cases of synaesthesia, as instances of what I call the extra qualia problem, are counterexamples to externalist versions of representationism






 
Waskan, Jonathan (forthcoming). A vehicular theory of corporeal qualia (a gift to computationalists). Philosophical Studies.   (Google)
Abstract: I have argued elsewhere that non-sentential representations that are the close kin of scale models can be, and often are, realized by computational processes. I will attempt here to weaken any resistance to this claim that happens to issue from those who favor an across-the-board computational theory of cognitive activity. I will argue that embracing the idea that certain computers harbor nonsentential models gives proponents of the computational theory of cognition the means to resolve the conspicuous disconnect between the sentential character of the data structures they posit and the nonsentential qualitative character of our perceptual experiences of corporeal (i.e., spatial, kinematic, and dynamic) properties. Along the way, I will question the viability of some externalist remedies for this disconnect, and I will explain why the computational theory put forward here falls quite clearly beyond the useful bounds of the Chinese-Room argument
 
White, Nicholas P. (1985). Prof. Shoemaker and so-called 'qualia' of experience. Philosophical Studies 47 (3).   (Google) 
 
Wright, Edmond L. (1990). Two more proofs of present qualia. Theoria 56 (1-2):3-22.   (Cited by 25 | Google) 
 
1.7a Qualia, Misc




Allen, Robert F. (ms). The subject is qualia.   (Google) 
 
Alter, Torin (2003). Qualia. In L Nadel (ed.), The Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science. Nature Publishing Group.   (Google)
Abstract: Introduction Qualia and causation Do qualia exist? Qualia and cognitive science Qualia and other mental phenomena Knowledge of qualia Are qualia irreducible?
 
Bailey, Andrew R. (1998). Phenomenal Properties: The Epistemology and Metaphysics of Qualia. Dissertation, University of Calgary   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 




 
Bailey, Andrew R. (ms). Qualia and the argument from illusion.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Bensusan, Hilan & de Carvalho, Eros (forthcoming). Qualia qua qualitons: Mental qualities as abstract particulars. Acta Analytica.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper we advocate the thesis that qualia are tropes (or qualitons), and not (universal) properties. The main advantage of the thesis is that we can accept both the Wittgensteinian and Sellarsian assault on the given and the claim that only subjective and private states can do justice to the qualitative character of experience. We hint that if we take qualia to be tropes, we dissolve the problem of inverted qualia. We develop an account of sensory concept acquisition that takes the presence of qualia as an enabling condition for learning. We argue that qualia taken to be qualitons are part of our mechanism of sensory concept acquisition





 
Block, Ned (2004). Qualia. In Richard L. Gregory (ed.), Oxford Companion to the Mind. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 18 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Qualia include the ways things look, sound and smell, the way it feels to have a pain; more generally, what it's like to have mental states. Qualia are experiential properties of sensations, feelings, perceptions and, in my view, thoughts and desires as well. But, so defined, who could deny that qualia exist? Yet, the existence of qualia is controversial. Here is what is controversial: whether qualia, so defined, can be characterized in intentional, functional or purely cognitive terms. Opponents of qualia think that the content of experience is intentional content (like the content of thought), or that experiences are functionally definable, or that to have a qualitative state is to have a state that is monitored in a certain way or accompanied by a thought to the effect that I have that state. If we include the idea that experiential properties are not intentional or functional or purely cognitive in the definition of `qualia', then it is controversial whether there are qualia





 
Block, Ned (2007). Wittgenstein and Qualia. Philosophical Perspectives 21 (1):73-115.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: (Wittgenstein, 1968) endorsed one kind of inverted spectrum hypothesis and rejected another. This paper argues that the kind of inverted spectrum hypothesis that Wittgenstein endorsed (the "innocuous" inverted spectrum hypothesis) is the thin end of the wedge that precludes a Wittgensteinian critique of the kind of inverted spectrum hypothesis he rejected (the "dangerous" kind). The danger of the dangerous kind is that it provides an argument for qualia, where qualia are (for the purposes of this paper) contents of experiential states which cannot be fully captured in natural language. I will pinpoint the difference between the innocuous and dangerous scenarios that matters for the argument for qualia, give arguments in favor of the coherence and possibility of the dangerous scenario, and try to show that some standard arguments against inverted spectra are ineffective against the version of the dangerous scenario I will be advocating. The leading idea of the paper is that an argument for qualia based on spectrum inversion does not require that the inversion be behaviorally indistinguishable. At one crucial point, I will rely on a less controversial version of an argument I gave in Block (1999). Wittgenstein's views provide a convenient starting point for a paper that is much more about qualia than about Wittgenstein.








 
Clark, Austen (1985). Qualia and the psychophysical explanation of color perception. Synthese 65 (December):377-405.   (Cited by 4 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: Can psychology explain the qualitative content of experience? A persistent philosophical objection to that discipline is that it cannot. Qualitative states or "qualia" are argued to have characteristics which cannot be explained in terms of their relationships to other psychological states, stimuli, and behavior. Since psychology is confined to descriptions of such relationships, it seems that psychology cannot explain qualia






 
Clark, Austen (2000). Quality space. In Austen Clar (ed.), A Theory of Sentience. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Crane, Tim (2000). The origins of qualia. In Tim Crane & Sarah A. Patterson (eds.), The History of the Mind-Body Problem. Routledge.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The mind-body problem in contemporary philosophy has two parts: the problem of mental causation and the problem of consciousness. These two parts are not unrelated; in fact, it can be helpful to see them as two horns of a dilemma. On the one hand, the causal interaction between mental and physical phenomena seems to require that all causally efficacious mental phenomena are physical; but on the other hand, the phenomenon of consciousness seems to entail that not all mental phenomena are physical.2 One may avoid this dilemma by adopting an epiphenomenalist view of consciousness, of course; but there is little independent reason for believing such a view. Rejecting epiphenomenalism, then, leaves contemporary philosophers with their problem: mental causation inclines them towards physicalism, while consciousness inclines them towards dualism





 
Cunningham, Bryon (2001). Capturing qualia: Higher-order concepts and connectionism. Philosophical Psychology 14 (1):29-41.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Antireductionist philosophers have argued for higher-order classifications of qualia that locate consciousness outside the scope of conventional scientific explanations, viz., by classifying qualia as intrinsic, basic, or subjective properties, antireductionists distinguish qualia from extrinsic, complex, and objective properties, and thereby distinguish conscious mental states from the possible explananda of functionalist or physicalist explanations. I argue that, in important respects, qualia are intrinsic, basic, and subjective properties of conscious mental states, and that, contrary to antireductionists' suggestions, these higher-order classifications are compatible with qualia reduction. I demonstrate this compatibility by examining the putative higher-order properties of qualia and comparing them to the higher-order properties characteristic of connectionist models of cognitive processes. I contend that the higher-order properties characteristic of connectionist networks approximate (in intertheoretic terms) the putative higher-order properties of qualia sufficiently well to conclude that qualia reductionism can (1) accommodate claims that qualia are intrinsic, basic, and subjective properties, and (2) explain the motivating intuitions for those claims generated by inverted, absent, and alien qualia thought experiments. In this way I argue that (approximate versions of) the putative higher-order classifications of qualia not only fail to defeat qualia reduction but, ironically, turn out to support it







 
de Rosa, Raffaella (2007). The myth of cartesian qualia. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 88 (2):181ï¿½207.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The standard view of Cartesian sensations (SV) is that they present themselves as purely qualitative features of experience (or qualia). Accordingly, Descartes view would be that in perceiving the color red, for example, we are merely experiencing the subjective feel of redness rather than seeming to perceive a property of bodies. In this paper, I establish that the argument and textual evidence offered in support of SV fail to prove that Descartes held this view. Indeed, I will argue that there are textual and theoretical reasons for believing that Descartes held the negation of SV. Qualia aren't Descartes legacy





 
Elitzur, Avshalom C. (2009). Consciousness makes a difference: A reluctant dualist’s confession. In A. Batthyany & A. C. Elitzur (eds.), Irreducibly Conscious: Selected Papers on Consciousness.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper’s outline is as follows. In sections 1-3 I give an exposi¬tion of the Mind-Body Problem, with emphasis on what I believe to be the heart of the problem, namely, the Percepts-Qualia Nonidentity and its incompatibility with the Physical Closure Paradigm. In 4 I present the “Qualia Inaction Postulate” underlying all non-interactionist theo¬ries that seek to resolve the above problem. Against this convenient postulate I propose in section 5 the “Bafflement Ar¬gument,” which is this paper's main thesis. Sections 6-11 critically dis¬cuss attempts to dismiss the Bafflement Argument by the “Baf¬flement=Mis¬perception Equation.” Section 12 offers a refutation of all such attempts in the form of a concise “Asymmetry Proof.” Section 13 points out the bearing of the Bafflement Argument on the evolutionary role of consciousness while section 14 acknowledges the price that has to be paid for it in terms of basic physical principles. Section 15 summarizes the paper, pointing out the inescapability of interactionist dualism.






 
Feser, Edward (2001). Qualia: Irreducibly subjective but not intrinsic. Journal of Consciousness Studies 8 (8):3-20.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Fox, Ivan (1989). On the nature and cognitive function of phenomenal content -- part one. Philosophical Topics 17 (1):81-103.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Gibbons, John (2005). Qualia: They're not what they seem. Philosophical Studies 126 (3):397-428.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Whether or not qualia are ways things seem, the view that qualia have the properties typically attributed to them is unjustified. Ways things seem do not have many of the properties commonly attributed to them. For example, inverted ways things seem are impossible. If ways things seem do not have the features commonly attributed to them, and qualia do have those same features, this looks like good reason to distinguish the two. But if your reasons for believing that qualia have the features are epistemically on a par with reasons for believing that ways things seem have the features, and you know that ways things seem do not have the features, then those reasons cannot justify your belief that qualia have the features. I argue that the reasons are epistemically on a par in this way






 
Gilbert, Paul (1992). Immediate experience. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 66:233-250.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google)




  
Gregory, Richard L. (1996). Peculiar qualia. Perception 25 (7):755-756.   (Google | More links) 








 
Hatfield, Gary (2007). The reality of qualia. Erkenntnis 66 (1-2):133--168.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This paper argues for the reality of qualia as aspects of phenomenal experience. The argument focuses on color vision and develops a dispositionalist, subjectivist account of what it is for an object to be colored. I consider objections to dispositionalism on epistemological, metaphysical, and






 
Jakab, Zolt (2000). Ineffability of qualia: A straightforward naturalistic explanation. Consciousness and Cognition 9 (3):329-351.   (Cited by 6 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper I offer an explanation of the ineffability (linguistic inexpressibility) of sensory experiences. My explanation is put in terms of computational functionalism and standard externalist theories of representational content. As I will argue, many or most sensory experiences are representational states without constituent structure. This property determines both the representational function these states can serve and the information that can be extracted from them when they are processed. Sensory experiences can indicate the presence of certain external states of affairs but they cannot convey any more information about them than that. So, format- or code-conversion mechanisms that link different systems of representation (linguistic and perceptual) to each other will fail to extract any relevant information from sensory experiences that could be coded in language. They only way to establish specific roles for sensory experiences in communication and the organization of behavior is to attach to them, by associative links, words, or other behavioral responses. If a sensory experience has no linguistic label associated to it in a particular subject, then no linguistic description can token, or activate, that state in the subject. In other words, no linguistic description can cause a subject to undergo an unlabeled perceptual state. On the contrary, complex, or syntactically structured perceptual states can be built up, on the basis of descriptions, by mechanisms of constructive imagination (conceived here as one sort of format conversion). It is this difference between complex and unstructured representational states that gives us an understanding of the phenomenon we call the ineffability of qualia








 
Jakab, Z. (2000). Reply to Thomas Metzinger and Bettina Walde. Consciousness and Cognition 9 (3):363-369.   (Google | More links) 







 
Kind, Amy (2001). Qualia realism. Philosophical Studies 104 (2):143-162.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Recent characterizations of the qualia debate construe the point at issue in terms of the existence of intrinsic properties of experience. I argue that such characterizations mistakenly ignore the epistemic dimension of the notion of qualia. Using Ned Block










 
Kitcher, P. S. (1979). Phenomenal qualities. American Philosophical Quarterly 16 (April):123-9.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google)




  
Kriegel, Uriah (2003). Consciousness as sensory quality and as implicit self-awareness. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 2 (1):1-26.   (Cited by 12 | Google | More links) 






 
Leeds, Stephen (1993). Qualia, awareness, Sellars. Noûs 27 (3):303-330.   (Cited by 9 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Levine, Joseph (1995). Qualia: Intrinsic, relational, or what? In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Ferdinand Schoningh.   (Cited by 13 | Google) 
 
Lormand, Eric (1994). Qualia! (Now showing at a theater near you). Philosophical Topics 22:127-156.   (Cited by 7 | Google)
Abstract: Despite such widespread acclaim, there are some influential theater critics who have panned Qualia!
 
Malatesti, Luca (2008). Mary’s Scientific Knowledge. Prolegomena: Journal of Philosophy 7 (1):37-59.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Frank Jackson’s knowledge argument (KA) aims to prove, by means of a thought experiment concerning the hypothetical scientist Mary, that conscious experiences have non-physical properties, called qualia. Mary has complete scientific knowledge of colours and colour vision without having had any colour experience. The central intuition in the KA is that, by seeing colours, Mary will learn what it is like to have colour experiences. Therefore, her scientific knowledge is incomplete, and conscious experiences have qualia. In this paper I consider an objection to the KA raised by Daniel Dennett. He maintains that the KA is vitiated by Jackson’s account of Mary’s scientific knowledge. While endorsing this criticism, I will defend the plausibility and relevance of the type of strategy involved in the KA by offering an account of Mary’s scientific knowledge. This account involves formulating a reasonable and not immediately false version of the physicalist thesis with regard to colour experiences. Whether this version of the KA is successful against this type of physicalism is not investigated here.





 
Metzinger, Thomas (2000). Commentary on jakab's Ineffability of Qualia. Consciousness and Cognition 9 (3):352-362.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Zoltan Jakab has presented an interesting conceptual analysis of the ineffability of qualia in a functionalist and classical cognitivist framework. But he does not want to commit himself to a certain metaphysical thesis on the ontology of consciousness or qualia. We believe that his strategy has yielded a number of highly relevant and interesting insights, but still suffers from some minor inconsistencies and a certain lack of phenomenological and empirical plausibility. This may be due to some background assumptions relating to the theory of mental representation employed. Jakab














 
Place, Ullin T. (2000). The causal potency of qualia: Its nature and its source. Brain and Mind 1 (2):183-192.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: There is an argument (Medlin, 1967; Place, 1988) whichshows conclusively that if qualia are causallyimpotent we could have no possible grounds forbelieving that they exist. But if, as this argumentshows, qualia are causally potent with respect to thedescriptions we give of them, it is tolerably certainthat they are causally potent in other morebiologically significant respects. The empiricalevidence, from studies of the effect of lesions of thestriate cortex (Humphrey, 1974; Weiskrantz, 1986;Cowey and Stoerig, 1995) shows that what is missing inthe absence of visual qualia is the ability tocategorize sensory inputs in the visual modality. This would suggest that the function of privateexperience is to supply what Broadbent (1971) callsthe evidence on which the categorization ofproblematic sensory inputs are based. At the sametime analysis of the causal relation shows that whatdifferentiates a causal relation from an accidentalspatio-temporal conjunction is the existence ofreciprocally related dispositional properties of theentities involved which combine to make it true thatif one member of the conjunction, the cause, had notexisted, the other, the effect, would not haveexisted. The possibility that qualia might bedispositional properties of experiences which, as itwere, supply the invisible glue that sticks cause toeffect in this case is examined, but finallyrejected





 
Putnam, Hilary (1981). Mind and body. In Reason, Truth and History. Cambridge University Press.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Robinson, William S. (online). Qualia realism. A Field Guide to the Philosophy of Mind.   (Google) 
 
Robinson, William S. (1999). Qualia realism and neural activation patterns. Journal of Consciousness Studies 10 (10):65-80.   (Google) 
 
Rosenthal, D. R. (1999). Sensory quality and the relocation story. Philosophical Perspectives 26:321-50.   (Cited by 12 | Google) 
 
Sharlow, Mark F. (ms). Qualia and the problem of universals.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper I explore the logical relationship between the question of the reality of qualia and the problem of universals. I argue that nominalism is inconsistent with the existence of qualia, and that realism either implies or makes plausible the existence of qualia. Thus, one's position on the existence of qualia is strongly constrained by one's answer to the problem of universals





 
Shoemaker, Sydney (2007). A case for qualia. In Brian P. McLaughlin & Jonathan D. Cohen (eds.), Contemporary Debates in Philosophy of Mind. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1994). Phenomenal character. Noûs 28 (1):21-38.   (Cited by 71 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1991). Qualia and consciousness. Mind 100 (399):507-24.   (Cited by 27 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1990). Qualities and qualia: What's in the mind? Philosophy and Phenomenological Research Supplement 50 (Supplement):109-131.   (Cited by 49 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 






 
Sleutels, Jan (1998). Phenomenal consciousness: Epiphenomenalism, naturalism and perceptual plasticity. Communication and Cognition 31 (1):21-55.   (Google) 
 
Stanley, Richard P. (1999). Qualia space. Journal of Consciousness Studies 6 (1):49-60.   (Google) 
 
Tye, Michael (online). Qualia. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.   (Cited by 15 | Google | More links) 





 
Tye, Michael (1978). Sensory properties. Behaviorism 6:213-219.   (Google) 
 
Vaden, Tere (2001). Qualifying qualia through the skyhook test. Inquiry 44 (2):149-170.   (Google) 
 
Weiss, J. & Montagnat, M. (2007). Long-range spatial correlations and scaling in dislocation and slip patterns. Philosophical Magazine 87 (8-9):1161-1174.   (Google) 
 
Wright, Edmond L. (ed.) (2008). The Case for Qualia. MIT Press.   (Google) 
 
1.7b Qualia and Materialism




Aranyosi, István (forthcoming). A new argument for mind-brain identity. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science.   (Google)
Abstract: In this paper I undertake the tasks of reconsidering Feigl’s notion of a ‘nomological dangler’ in light of recent discussion about the viability of accommodating phenomenal properties, or qualia, within a physicalist picture of reality, and of constructing an argument to the effect that nomological danglers, including the way qualia are understood to be related to brain states by contemporary dualists, are extremely unlikely. I offer a probabilistic argument to the effect that merely nomological danglers are extremely unlikely, the only probabilistically coherent candidates being ‘anomic danglers’ (not even nomically correlated) and ‘necessary danglers’ (more than merely nomically correlated). After I show, based on similar probabilistic reasoning, that the first disjunct (anomic danglers) is very unlikely, I conclude that the identity thesis is the only remaining candidate for the mental/physical connection. The novelty of the argument is that it brings probabilistic considerations in favour of physicalism, a move that has been neglected in the recent burgeoning literature on the subject. 

 
Aranyosi, István (2003). Physical constituents of qualia. Philosophical Studies 116 (2):103-131.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: ABSTRACT. In this paper I propose a defense of a posteriori materialism. Prob- lems with a posteriori identity materialism are identi?ed, and a materialism based on composition, not identity, is proposed. The main task for such a proposal is to account for the relation between physical and phenomenal properties. Compos- ition does not seem to be ?t as a relation between properties, but I offer a peculiar way to understand property-composition, based on some recent ideas in the literature on ontology. Finally, I propose a materialist model for the mind-body relation that is able to resist the attack from conceivability arguments









 
Bailey, Andrew R. (ms). Multiple realizability, qualia, and natural kinds.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Are qualia natural kinds? In order to give this question slightly more focus, and to show why it might be an interesting question, let me begin by saying a little about what I take qualia to be, and what natural kinds. For the purposes of this paper, I shall be assuming a fairly full-blooded kind of phenomenal realism about qualia: qualia, thus, include the qualitative painfulness of pain (rather than merely the functional specification of pain states), the qualitative redness in the visual field that typically accompanies red discriminations, the taste of lemon (independently of the fact that such states are normally caused by lemons and give rise to puckering of the lips, etc.), and so on. In other words, I am assuming the falsity of functionalism with respect to qualia, though I am not for a moment assuming dualism







 
Bostrom, Nick (ms). Quantity of experience: Brain duplication and degrees of consciousness.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: If a brain is duplicated so that there are two brains in identical states, are there then two numerically distinct phenomenal experiences or only one? There are two, I argue, and given computationalism, this has implications for what it is to implement a computation. I then consider what happens when a computation is implemented in a system that either uses unreliable components or possesses varying degrees of parallelism. I show that in some of these cases there can be, in a deep and intriguing sense, a fractional (non-integer) number of qualitatively identical phenomenal experiences. This, in turn, has implications for what lessons one should draw from neural replacement scenarios such as Chalmers








 
Clark, Austen (1985). A physicalist theory of qualia. The Monist 68 (October):491-506.   (Cited by 4 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: Although the capacity to discriminate between different qualia is typically admitted to have a definition in terms of functional role, the qualia thereby related are thought to elude functional definition. In this paper I argue that these views are inconsistent. Given a functional model of discrimination, one can construct from it a definition of qualia. The problem is similar in many ways to Goodman's definition of qualia in terms of 'matching', and I argue that many of his findings survive reinterpretation into a physicalistic basis which employs 'indiscriminability' as its primitive term. I show how one can identify the critical properties to which discrimination capacities are sensitive, and then identify their order. A problem arises concerning the different ways in which qualitatively distinct experiences can differ (hue, shape, and so on). Physicalist accounts have often been accused of relying in a circular fashion on some antecedent understanding of phenomenal properties in order to specify those differences. This account avoids such an accusation: ordering of critical properties is determined by the dimensionality of discriminations, and the latter is given by the structure of the discrimination pair lists. Once a topology of quality is constructed, qualia names can be defined by their relative location within the order. In the conclusion I argue that psychophysics employs physicalist techniques to define a topology of quality, and that it can provide what Thomas Nagel calls an "objective phenomenology."





 
Cornman, James W. (1971). Materialism and Sensations. Yale University Press.   (Cited by 11 | Google) 
 
Double, Richard (1985). Phenomenal properties. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 45 (March):383-92.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Harding, Gregory (1991). Color and the mind-body problem. Review of Metaphysics 45 (2):289-307.   (Cited by 49 | Annotation | Google)




  
Holborow, L. C. (1973). Materialism and phenomenal qualities. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 47 (July):107-19.   (Google) 
 
Horgan, Terence E. (1987). Supervenient qualia. Philosophical Review 96 (October):491-520.   (Cited by 27 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Howell, Robert J. (online). The Hard Problem of Consciousness. Scholarpedia.   (Google) 
 
Jolley, Kelly D. & Watkins, Michael (1998). What is it like to be a phenomenologist? Philosophical Quarterly 48 (191):204-9.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 








 
Lewis, David (1995). Should a materialist believe in qualia? Australasian Journal of Philosophy 73 (1):140-44.   (Cited by 18 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 








 
Lycan, William G. (1987). Phenomenal objects: A backhanded defense. Philosophical Perspectives 3:513-26.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Mandik, Pete & Weisberg, Josh (2008). Type-q materialism. In Chase Wrenn (ed.), Naturalism, Reference and Ontology: Essays in Honor of Roger F. Gibson. Peter Lang Publishing Group.   (Google)
Abstract: s Gibson (1982) correctly points out, despite Quine’s brief flirtation with a “mitigated phenomenalism” (Gibson’s phrase) in the late 1940’s and early 1950’s, Quine’s ontology of 1953 (“On Mental Entities”) and beyond left no room for non-physical sensory objects or qualities. Anyone familiar with the contemporary neo-dualist qualia-freak-fest might wonder why Quinean lessons were insufficiently transmitted to the current generation
 
Marras, Ausonio (1993). Materialism, functionalism, and supervenient qualia. Dialogue 32 (3):475-92.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google)




  
Marsh, Leslie (ms). Man Without Qualities.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The question of how a physical system gives rise to the phenomenal or experiential (olfactory, visual, somatosensitive, gestatory and auditory), is considered the most intractable of scientific and philosophical puzzles. Though this question has dominated the philosophy of mind over the last quarter century, it articulates a version of the age-old mind-body problem. The most famous response, Cartesian dualism, is on Daniel Dennett’s view still a corrosively residual and redundant feature of popular (and academic) thinking on these matters. Fifteen years on from his anti-Cartesian theory of consciousness (Consciousness Explained, 1991), Dennett’s frustration with this tradition is still palpable. This frustration is primarily aimed at philosophers





 
Mellor, D. H. (1973). Materialism and phenomenal qualities II. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 47 (July):107-19.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Newman, David V. (2004). Chaos and qualia. Essays in Philosophy 5 (1):1-21.   (Google) 
 
Nicholson, Dennis (ms). How qualia can be physical.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Assume that a quale as we experience it is a perspective on an underlying physical state, rather than the physical state as such – the reality as known as distinct from the reality as such. Assume, further, that this inner perspective is integral to, and materially co-extensive with, the physical state itself. Assume, finally, that the physical state in question is known as a brain state of a particular kind by an external observer of the brain in which it occurs. The result is a perspective in which a quale is entirely physical; a position that resolves several known difficulties for physicalism, including those associated with the explanatory gap, Jackson’s knowledge argument, and Chalmers’ hard problem of consciousness






 
P,  (2002). Physicalism, qualia and mental concepts. Theoria 17 (44):359-379.   (Google) 
 
Robinson, Howard M. (1972). Professor Armstrong on 'non-physical sensory items'. Mind 81 (January):84-86.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 







 
Robb, David (2008). Zombies from Below. In Simone Gozzano Francesco Orilia (ed.), Tropes, Universals, and the Philosophy of Mind: Essays at the Boundary of Ontology and Philosophical Psychology. Ontos Verlag.   (Google)
Abstract: A zombie is a creature just like a conscious being in certain respects, but wholly lacking in consciousness. In this paper, I look at zombies from the perspective of basic ontology (“from below”), taking as my starting point a trope ontology I have defended elsewhere. The consequences of this ontology for zombies are mixed. Viewed from below, one sort of zombie—the exact dispositional zombie—is impossible. A similar argument can be wielded against another sort—the exact physical zombie—but here supplementary principles are needed to get to the impossibility result. Finally, at least two sorts of zombie—the behavioural and functional zombies—escape these arguments from below.
 
Tallis, Raymond C. (1989). Tye on 'the subjective qualities of experience': A critique. Philosophical Investigations 12 (July):217-222.   (Google) 
 
Tye, Michael (1986). The subjective qualities of experience. Mind 95 (January):1-17.   (Cited by 27 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Unwin, Nicholas (ms). Explaining Colour Phenomenology: Reduction versus Connection.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: A major part of the mind–body problem is to explain why a given set of physical processes should give rise to qualia of one sort rather than another. Colour hues are the usual example considered here, and there is a lively debate between, for example, Hardin, Levine, Jackson, Clark and Chalmers as to whether the results of colour vision science can provide convincing explanations of why colours actually look the way they do. This paper examines carefully the type of explanation that is needed here, and it is concluded that it does not have to be reductive to be effective. What needs to be explained more than anything is why inverted hue scenarios are more intuitive than other sensory inversions: and the issue of physicalism versus dualism is only of marginal relevance here.





 
Weslake, Brad, Review of understanding phenomenal consciousness.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In recent philosophy of mind, epiphenomenalism—that strain of dualism according to which the mind is caused by the body but does not cause the body in turn—has undergone something of a renaissance. Contemporary epiphenomenalists bear only partial resemblance to their more extravagantly metaphysical ancestors, however. Traditional epiphenomenalists thought that (at least) two sorts of mental properties were epiphenomenal—intentional properties such as the meaning or representational content of the propositional attitudes (beliefs, desires and so on); and conscious properties such as awareness and the qualitative nature of experience. Contemporary epiphenomenalists, on the other hand, are largely sanguine about the prospects for intentionality to be brought within the purview of a physicalist worldview; what forces their dualism is one particular feature of consciousness—what irks them are qualia, the..





 
1.7c Eliminativism about Qualia




Arvan, Marcus (1998). Out with Qualia and in with Consciousness: Why the Hard Problem is a Myth. Dissertation, Tufts Honours Thesis   (Google)
Abstract: The subjective features of conscious mental processes--as opposed to their physical causes and effects--cannot be captured by the purified form of thought suitable for dealing with the physical world that underlies appearances." (Nagel, in Dennett, 1991, p. 372)
 
de Leon, David (2001). The qualities of qualia. Communication and Cognition 34 (1):121-138.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: This essay is a defence of the traditional notion of qualia - as properties of consciousness that are ineffable, intrinsic, private and immediately apprehensible - against the eliminative attempts of Daniel Dennett in the influential article "Quining Qualia." It is suggested that a thorough exploration of the concept is an appropriate starting point for future explanations of qualia, and the essay ends with some possible explanations of the four traditional properties








 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1991). Lovely and suspect qualities. In Enrique Villanueva (ed.), [Book Chapter]. Ridgeview.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: A family of compelling intuitions work to keep "the problem of consciousness" systematically insoluble, and David Rosenthal, in a series of papers including the one under discussion, has been resolutely driving these intuitions apart, exposing them individually to the light, and proposing alternatives. In this instance the intuition that has seemed sacrosanct, but falls to his analysis, is the intuition that "sensory quality" and consciousness are necessarily united: that, for instance, there could not be unconscious pains, or unconscious subjective shades of blue, or unconscious aromas of freshly roasted coffee beans. The particular airborne polymers that are the vehicles of freshly roasted coffee beans could exist, of course, in the absence of any observer, and hence of any consciousness, but the sensory quality of that aroma requires--according to well-entrenched intuition--not only an observer but a conscious observer. Such properties have no esse except as percipi













 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1988). Quining qualia. In Anthony J. Marcel & E. Bisiach (eds.), [Book Chapter]. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 191 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: "Qualia" is an unfamiliar term for something that could not be more familiar to each of us: the ways things seem to us. As is so often the case with philosophical jargon, it is easier to give examples than to give a definition of the term. Look at a glass of milk at sunset; the way it looks to you--the particular, personal, subjective visual quality of the glass of milk is the quale of your visual experience at the moment. The way the milk tastes to you then is another, gustatory quale, and how it sounds to you as you swallow is an auditory quale; These various "properties of conscious experience" are prime examples of qualia. Nothing, it seems, could you know more intimately than your own qualia; let the entire universe be some vast illusion, some mere figment of Descartes' evil demon, and yet what the figment is made of (for you) will be the qualia of your hallucinatory experiences. Descartes claimed to doubt everything that could be doubted, but he never doubted that his conscious experiences had qualia, the properties by which he knew or apprehended them












 
Dennett, Daniel C. (ms). Two Black boxes: A fable.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Once upon a time, there were two large black boxes, A and B, connected by a long insulated copper wire. On box A there were two buttons, marked *a* and *b*, and on box B there were three lights, red, green, and amber. Scientists studying the behavior of the boxes had observed that whenever you pushed the *a* button on box A, the red light flashed briefly on box B, and whenever you pushed the *b* button on box A, the green light flashed briefly. The amber light never seemed to flash. They performed a few billion trials, under a very wide variety of conditions, and found no exceptions. There seemed to them to be a causal regularity, which they conveniently summarized thus









 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1981). Wondering where the yellow went. The Monist 64 (January):102-8.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google)




  
Everett, Anthony (1996). Qualia and vagueness. Synthese 106 (2):205-226.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Garcia-Carpintero, Manuel (2003). Qualia that it is right to Quine. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 67 (2):357-377.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 





 
Hacker, R. S. (2005). Goodbye to qualia and all what? A reply to David Hodgson. Journal of Consciousness Studies 12 (11):61-66.   (Google) 
 
Hall, Richard J. (2007). Phenomenal properties as dummy properties. Philosophical Studies 135 (2).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Can the physicalist consistently hold that representational content is all there is to sensory experience and yet that two perceivers could have inverted phenomenal spectra? Yes, if he holds that the phenomenal properties the inverts experience are dummy properties, not instantiated in the physical objects being perceived nor in the perceivers





 
Hodgson, David (2005). Goodbye to qualia and all that? Review article. Journal of Consciousness Studies 12 (2):84-88.   (Google)
Abstract: Max Bennett is a distinguished Australian neuroscientist, Peter Hacker an Oxford philosopher and leading authority on Wittgenstein. A book resulting from their collaboration, Philosophical Foundations of Neuroscience, has received high praise. According to the Blackwell website, G.H. von Wright asserts that it 'will certainly, for a long time to come, be the most important contribution to the mind-body problem that there is'; and Sir Anthony Kenny says it 'shows that the claims made on behalf of cognitive science are ill-founded'. M.R. Bennett & P.M.S. Hacker, Philosophical Foundations of Neuroscience (Oxford: Blackwell, 2003)
 
Jacoby, H. (1985). Eliminativism, meaning, and qualitative states. Philosophical Studies 47 (March):257-70.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Levine, Joseph (1994). Out of the closet: A qualophile confronts qualophobia. Philosophical Topics 22:107-126.   (Cited by 7 | Annotation | Google)




  
Levin, Michael E. (1981). Phenomenal properties. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 42 (March):42-58.   (Cited by 4 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Mason, Danielle (2005). Demystifying without quining: Wittgenstein and Dennett on qualitative states. South African Journal of Philosophy 24 (1):33-43.   (Google | More links) 





 
Park, Eugene (1997). Against Dennett's eliminativism: Preserving qualia as a coherent concept. The Dualist 4.   (Google) 
 
Pradhan, R. C. (2002). Why qualia cannot be quined. Journal of Indian Council of Philosophical Research 19 (2):85-102.   (Google) 
 
P,  (2000). Naturalizing qualia, destroying qualia. Dialogos 35 (76):65-83.   (Google) 
 
Ross, Don (1993). Quining qualia Quine's way. Dialogue 32 (3):439-59.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Seager, William E. (1993). The elimination of experience. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 53 (2):345-65.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Wright, Edmond L. (1989). Querying "quining qualia". Acta Analytica 4 (5):9-32.   (Google) 
 
Wright, Edmond L. (online). The defence of qualia.   (Google)
Abstract: In view of the excellent arguments that have been put forth recently in favour of qualia, internal sensory presentations, it would strike an impartial observer - one could imagine a future historian of philosophy - as extremely odd why so many philosophers who are opposed to qualia, that is, sensory experiences internal to the brain, have largely ignored those arguments in their own. There has been a fashionable assumption that any theory of perception which espouses qualia has long since been overcome by a number of 'formidable' objections, in particular, the Homunculus/Infinite Regress Objection, the Solipsism Objection, Austin's Illusion/Delusion Objection, the Ludicrousness-of-Colours-in-the-Brain Objection, the Indirect-Realist-has-to-assume-Direct-Realism Objection, the Impossibility-of-Comparing-Internal-with-External Objection, the Impossibility of Intrinsic Experience, and several more minor varieties of these. It is uncanny how they continue to be repeated, indeed, with a kind of automatism, evidenced by the fact that none of those who repeat them appear to have taken note of the answers to the objections. Indeed, they only appear to refer to those philosophers with whom they agree: it has long been insisted upon in the study of rhetoric that one of the weakest things to do in an argument is to ignore the main points made by one's opponent: 
[it is] the wisest plan _to state Objections in their full force_ ; at least, wherever there does exist a satisfactory
 answer to them; otherwise, those who hear them stated more strongly than by the uncandid advocate who
 had undertaken to repel them, will naturally enough conclude that they are unanswerable. It is but a
 momentary and ineffective triumph that can be obtained by man
 
1.7d The Inverted Spectrum




Alter, Torin, Comments on John Kulvicki's “what is what it's like?” (2003 eastern div. Apa).   (Google)
Abstract: Kulvicki’s goal is to give a representationalist account of what it’s like to see a property that is “fully externalist about perceptual representation” (p. 1) and yet accommodates a certain “internalist intuition” (p. 4), which he describes as follows: “something about what it is like to see a property is internally determined, dependent only on the way one is built from the skin in” (p. 3). He illustrates this intuition with an inverted spectrum case and the manifest-image problem. On his view, there’s an apparent conflict between the intuition and representationalism. That’s because, on representationalism, “what it is like to see a shade of color can be exhaustively explained in terms of what is perceptually represented” (p. 1) and, he claims, “all representational facts are externally determined” (p. 4). In short, if what it’s like is partly internally determined, then how can it be fully explained in terms of externally determined representational facts?
 
Bangert, U.; Barnes, R.; Hounsome, L. S.; Jones, R.; Blumenau, A. T.; Briddon, P. R.; Shaw, M. J. & Oberg, S. (2006). Electron energy loss spectroscopic studies of brown diamonds. Philosophical Magazine 86 (29-31):4757-4779.   (Google | More links) 





 
Block, Ned (1990). Inverted earth. Philosophical Perspectives 4:53-79.   (Cited by 146 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Broackes, Justin (2007). Black and white and the inverted spectrum. Philosophical Quarterly 57 (227):161-175.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 





 
Byrne, Alex (online). Gert on the shifted spectrum.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: As Gert says, the basic claim of representationism is that the phenomenal character of an experience supervenes on its representational content. Restricted to color experience, representationism may be put as follows





 
Byrne, Alex & Hilbert, David R. (2006). Hoffman's "proof" of the possibility of spectrum inversion. Consciousness and Cognition 15 (1):48-50.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Philosophers have devoted a great deal of discussion to the question of whether an inverted spectrum thought experiment refutes functionalism. (For a review of the inverted spectrum and its many philosophical applications, see Byrne, 2004.) If Ho?man is correct the matter can be swiftly and conclusively settled, without appeal to any empirical data about color vision (or anything else). Assuming only that color experiences and functional relations can be mathematically represented, a simple mathematical result






 
Byrne, Alex (online). Inverted qualia. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.   (Cited by 8 | Google)
Abstract: Qualia inversion thought experiments are ubiquitous in contemporary philosophy of mind (largely due to the influence of Shoemaker 1982 and Block 1990). The most popular kind is one or another variant of Locke's hypothetical case of
 
Byrne, Alex (1999). Subjectivity is no barrier. Brain and Behavioral Sciences 22 (6):949-950.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Palmer's subjectivity barrier seems to be erected on a popular but highly suspect conception of visual experience, and his color room argument is invalid






 
Campbell, Neil (2004). Generalizing qualia inversion. Erkenntnis 60 (1):27-34.   (Google | More links) 






 
Campbell, Neil (2000). Physicalism, qualia inversion, and affective states. Synthese 124 (2):239-256.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 






 
Canfield, John V. (2009). Ned Block, Wittgenstein, and the inverted spectrum. Philosophia 37 (4):691-712.   (Google)
Abstract: In ‘Wittgenstein and Qualia’ Ned Block argues for the existence of inverted spectra and those ineffable things, qualia. The essence of his discussion is a would-be proof, presented through a series of pictures, of the possible existence of an inverted spectrum. His argument appeals to some remarks by Wittgenstein which, Block holds, commit the former to a certain ‘dangerous scenario’ wherein inverted spectra, and consequently qualia live and breath. I hold that a key premise of this proof is incoherent. Furthermore, Block’s dangerous scenario does not follow from Wittgenstein’s innocent one, as Block believes it does, but rather is in conflict with it
 
Casati, Roberto (1990). What is wrong in inverting spectra? Teoria 10:183-6.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Churchland, Paul M. & Churchland, Patricia S. (1981). Functionalism, qualia and intentionality. Philosophical Topics 12:121-32.   (Cited by 23 | Annotation | Google)




  
Clark, Austen (online). A subjectivist reply to spectrum inversion.   (Google)
Abstract: Subjectivists hold that you cannot specify color kinds without implicitly or explicitly referring to the dispositions of observers. Even though "yellow" is ascribed to physical items, and presumably there is something physical in each such item causing it to be so characterized, the only physical similarity between all such items is that they all affect an observer in the same way. So the principles organizing the colors are all found within the skin
 
Clark, Austen (online). Inversions spectral and bright: Comments on Melinda Campbell.   (Google)
Abstract: Spectrum inversion is a thought experiment, and I would wager that there is no better diagnostic test to the disciplinary affiliation of a randomly selected member of the audience than your reaction to a thought experiment. It is a litmus test. If you find that you are paying close attention, subvocalizing objections, and that your heart-rate and metabolism go up, you have turned pink: you are a philosopher. If on the other hand the thought experiment leaves you cold, and you wonder why otherwise sensible people would worry about such things, you have turned blue and you are a psychologist
 
Clark, Austen (1985). Spectrum inversion and the color solid. Southern Journal of Philosophy 23:431-43.   (Cited by 7 | Annotation | Google)





Abstract: The possibility that what looks red to me may look green to you has traditionally been known as "spectrum inversion." This possibility is thought to create difficulties for any attempt to define mental states in terms of behavioral dispositions or functional roles. If spectrum inversion is possible, then it seems that two perceptual states may have identical functional antecedents and effects yet differ in their qualitative content. In that case the qualitative character of the states could not be functionally defined
 
Cohen, Jonathan (2001). Color, content, and Fred: On a proposed reductio of the inverted spectrum hypothesis. Philosophical Studies 103 (2):121-144.   (Cited by 5 | Google | More links) 




 
Cole, David J. (1990). Functionalism and inverted spectra. Synthese 82 (2):207-22.   (Cited by 56 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Cole, David J. (ms). Inverted spectrum arguments.   (Cited by 2 | Google)
Abstract: Formerly a spectral apparition that haunted behaviorism and provided a puzzle about our knowledge of other minds, the inverted spectrum possibility has emerged as an important challenge to functionalist accounts of qualia. The inverted spectrum hypothesis raises the possibility that two individuals might think and behave in the same way yet have different qualia. The traditional supposition is of an individual who has a subjective color spectrum that is inverted with regard to that had by other individuals. When he looks at red objects, this individual has the qualia normally produced in others by blue objects. And when presented with a blue object, this individual experiences qualia that most persons experience only when presented with red objects. And so forth - the Invert's color spectrum is the inverse of normal; there are systematic inter-subjective differences in qualia
 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1994). Instead of qualia. In Antti Revonsuo & Matti Kamppinen (eds.), Consciousness in Philosophy and Cognitive Neuroscience. Lawrence Erlbaum.   (Cited by 14 | Annotation | Google)





Abstract: Philosophers have adopted various names for the things in the beholder (or properties of the beholder) that have been supposed to provide a safe home for the colors and the rest of the properties that have been banished from the "external" world by the triumphs of physics: "raw feels", "sensa", "phenomenal qualities" "intrinsic properties of conscious experiences" "the qualitative content of mental states" and, of course, "qualia," the term I will use. There are subtle differences in how these terms have been defined, but I'm going to ride roughshod over them. I deny that there are
 
Dennett, Daniel C. (1999). Swift and enormous. Brain and Behavioral Sciences 22 (6).   (Google)
Abstract: As a lefthanded person, I can wonder whether I am a left-hemisphere-dominant speaker or a right-hemisphere-dominant speaker or something mixed, and the only way I can learn the truth is by submitting myself to objective, Athird-person@ testing. I don =t Ahave access to @ this intimate fact about how my own mind does its work. It escapes all my attempts at introspective detection, and might, for all I know, shunt back and forth every few seconds without my being any the wiser. In striking contrast to this is the traditional idea that there are
 
Gert, Bernard (1965). Imagination and verifiability. Philosophical Studies 16 (3):44-47.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Ginet, Carl A. (1999). Qualia and private language. Philosophical Topics 26:121-38.   (Google) 
 
Hardin, C. L. & Hardin, W. J. (2006). A tale of Hoffman. Consciousness and Cognition 15 (1):46-47.   (Google | More links) 





 
Hardin, C. L. (1988). Color for Philosophers. Hackett.   (Cited by 383 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




























 
Harrison, Bernard (1973). Form and Content. Blackwell.   (Cited by 19 | Annotation | Google)




  
Harrison, Bernard (1967). On describing colors. Inquiry 10 (1-4):38-52.   (Cited by 7 | Google) 
 
Hardin, C. L. (1987). Qualia and materialism: Closing the explanatory gap. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 48 (December):281-98.   (Cited by 14 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Hardin, C. L. (1991). Reply to Levine's 'cool red'. Philosophical Psychology 4:41-50.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Hardin, C. L. (1997). Reinverting the spectrum. In Alex Byrne & David R. Hilbert (eds.), Readings on Color, Volume 1: The Philosophy of Color. MIT Press.   (Cited by 25 | Google) 
 
Harvey, J. (1979). Systematic transposition of colours. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 57 (September):211-19.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 






 
Hatfield, Gary (1992). Color perception and neural encoding: Does metameric matching entail a loss of information? Philosophy of Science Association 1992:492-504.   (Cited by 10 | Google | More links) 




 
Hilbert, David R. & Kalderon, Mark Eli (2000). Color and the inverted spectrum. In Steven Davis (ed.), Vancouver Studies in Cognitive Science. New York: Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 23 | Google)
Abstract: If you trained someone to emit a particular sound at the sight of something red, another at the sight of something yellow, and so on for other colors, still he would not yet be describing objects by their colors. Though he might be a help to us in giving a description. A description is a representation of a distribution in a space (in that of time, for instance)
 
Hoffman, Donald D. (2006). The scrambling theorem: A simple proof of the logical possibility of spectrum inversion. Consciousness and Cognition 15 (1):31-45.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links) 






 
Hoffman, Donald D. (2006). The scrambling theorem unscrambled: A response to commentaries. Consciousness and Cognition 15 (1):51-53.   (Google | More links) 






 
Horgan, Terence E. (1984). Functionalism, qualia, and the inverted spectrum. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 44 (June):453-69.   (Cited by 10 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Johnsen, Bredo C. (1993). The intelligibility of spectrum inversion. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 23 (4):631-6.   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Johnsen, Bredo C. (1986). The inverted spectrum. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 64 (December):471-6.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 







 
Kalderon, Mark (ms). Color and the inverted spectrum.   (Google)
Abstract: If you trained someone to emit a particular sound at the sight of something red, another at the sight of something yellow, and so on for other colors, still he would not yet be describing objects by their colors. Though he might be a help to us in giving a description. A description is a representation of a distribution in a space (in that of time, for instance)
 
Kirk, Robert E. (1982). Goodbye to transposed qualia. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 82:33-44.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google)




  
Kirk, Robert E. (1994). Raw Feeling: A Philosophical Account of the Essence of Consciousness. Oxford University Press.   (Cited by 48 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Levine, Joseph (1988). Absent and inverted qualia revisited. Mind and Language 3:271-87.   (Cited by 5 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Levine, Joseph (1991). Cool red. Philosophical Psychology 4:27-40.   (Cited by 16 | Annotation | Google)




  
Linsky, Leonard (1962). The incommunicability of content. Journal of Philosophy 59 (January):21-22.   (Google | More links) 





 
Littlejohn, Clayton (2009). On the coherence of inversion. Acta Analytica 24 (2).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper, I shall evaluate a strategy recently used to try to demonstrate the impossibility of behaviorally undetectable spectrum inversion. After showing that the impossibility proof proves too much, I shall identify where it goes wrong. In turn, I shall explain why someone attracted to functionalist and representationalist assumptions might rightly remain agnostic about the possibility of inversion





 
Lycan, William G. (1973). Inverted spectrum. Ratio 15 (July):315-9.   (Cited by 12 | Annotation | Google)




  
MacLaury, Robert E. (1999). Asymmetry among Hering primaries thwarts the inverted spectrum argument. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22 (6):960-961.   (Google)
Abstract: Purest points of Hering's six primary colors reside at different levels of lightness such that inversion of each hue pair would be detectable in subjects' choice of foci on the Munsell array. An inverted spectrum would not impose the isomorphism constraint on a contrast of red-green or yellow-blue, whatever we conclude about inference in functionalism
 
Macpherson, Fiona (2005). Colour inversion problems for representationalism. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 70 (1):127-152.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper I examine whether representationalism can account for various thought experiments about colour inversions. Representationalism is, at minimum, the view that, necessarily, if two experiences have the same representational content then they have the same phenomenal character. I argue that representationalism ought to be rejected if one holds externalist views about experiential content and one holds traditional exter- nalist views about the nature of the content of propositional attitudes. Thus, colour inver- sion scenarios are more damaging to externalist representationalist views than have been previously thought. More specifically, I argue that representationalists who endorse externalism about experiential content either have to become internalists about the content of propositional attitudes or they have to adopt a novel variety of externalism about the content of propositional attitudes. This novel type of propositional attitude externalism is investigated. It can be seen that adopting it forces one to reject Putnam








 
Marcus, Eric (2006). Intentionalism and the imaginability of the inverted spectrum. Philosophical Quarterly 56 (224):321-339.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: There has been much written in recent years about whether a pair of subjects could have visual experiences that represented the colors of objects in their environment in precisely the same way, despite differing significantly in what it was like to undergo them, differing that is, in their qualitative character. The possibility of spectrum inversion has been so much debated1 in large part because of the threat that it would pose to the more general doctrine of Intentionalism, according to which the representational content of an experience fixes what it






 
Maund, Barry (2006). Comments. Dialectica 60 (3):347-353.   (Google | More links) 




 
McKeon, B. J. & Morrison, J. F. (2007). Asymptotic scaling in turbulent pipe flow. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society a-Mathematical Physical and Engineering Sciences 365 (1852):771-787.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 





 
Meyer, Ulrich (2000). Do pseudonormal persons have inverted qualia? Facta Philosophica 2:309-25.   (Google) 
 
Mizrahi, Vivian & Nida-Rumelin, Martine (2006). Introduction. Dialectica 60 (3):209-222.   (Google | More links) 




 
Myin, Erik (1999). Beyond intrinsicness and dazzling blacks. Brain and Behavioral Sciences 22 (6):964-965.   (Cited by 9 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Palmer's target article is surely one of the most scientifically detailed and knowledgeable treatments of spectrum inversion ever. Unfortunately, it is built on a very shaky philosophical foundation, the notion of the "intrinsic". In the article's ontology, there are two kinds of properties of mental states, intrinsic properties and relational properties. The whole point of the article is that these aspects of experience are mutually exclusive: the intrinsic is nonrelational and the relational is nonintrinsic





 
Myin, Erik (2001). Color and the duplication assumption. Synthese 129 (1):61-77.   (Cited by 12 | Google | More links)
Abstract:   Susan Hurley has attacked the ''Duplication Assumption'', the assumption thatcreatures with exactly the same internal states could function exactly alike inenvironments that are systematically distorted. She argues that the dynamicalinterdependence of action and perception is highly problematic for the DuplicationAssumption when it involves spatial states and capacities, whereas no such problemsarise when it involves color states and capacities. I will try to establish that theDuplication Assumption makes even less sense for lightness than for some ofthe spatial cases. This is due not only to motor factors, but to the basic physicalasymmetry between black and white. I then argue that the case can be extendedfrom lightness perception to hue perception. Overall, the aims of this paper are:(1) to extend Susan Hurley''s critique of the Duplication Assumption; (2) to argueagainst highly constrained versions of Inverted Spectrum arguments; (3) to proposea broader conception of the vehicle for color perception







 
Myin, Erik (2001). Constrained inversions of sensations. Philosophica (Belgium) 68 (2):31-40.   (Google) 
 
Nida-Rumelin, Martine (1999). Intrinsic phenomenal properties in color science: A reply to Peter Ross. Consciousness and Cognition 8 (4):571-574.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links) 






 
Nida-Rumelin, Martine (1996). Pseudonormal vision: An actual case of qualia inversion? Philosophical Studies 82 (2):145-57.   (Cited by 24 | Annotation | Google)




  
Nida-Rumelin, Martine (1999). Pseudonormal vision and color qualia. In Stuart R. Hameroff, Alfred W. Kaszniak & David J. Chalmers (eds.), Toward a Science of Consciousness III. MIT Press.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
O'Brien, Gerard & Opie, Jonathan (1999). Finding a place for experience in the physical-relational structure of the brain. Brain and Behavioral Sciences 22 (6):966-967.   (Cited by 2 | Google | More links)
Abstract: In restricting his analysis to the causal relations of functionalism, on the one hand, and the neurophysiological realizers of biology, on the other, Palmer has overlooked an alternative conception of the relationship between color experience and the brain - one that liberalises the relation between mental phenomena and their physical implementation, without generating functionalism






 
O'Connor, D. J. (1955). Awareness and communication. Journal of Philosophy 52 (September):505-514.   (Google | More links) 





 
Palmer, Stephen . (1999). Color, consciousness, and the isomorphism constraint. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22 (6):923-943.   (Cited by 78 | Google | More links)
Abstract: The relations among consciousness, brain, behavior, and scientific explanation are explored in the domain of color perception. Current scientific knowledge about color similarity, color composition, dimensional structure, unique colors, and color categories is used to assess Locke













 
Peirce, M. (2001). Inverted intuitions: Occupants and roles. Southern Journal of Philosophy 39 (2):273-298.   (Google) 
 
Pelczar, Michael (2008). On an argument for functional invariance. Minds and Machines 18 (3).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The principle of functional invariance states that it is a natural law that conscious beings with the same functional organization have the same quality of conscious experience. A group of arguments in support of this principle are rejected, on the grounds that they establish at most only the weaker intra-subjective principle that any two stages in the life of a single conscious being that duplicate one another in terms of functional organization also duplicate one another in terms of quality of phenomenal experience






 
Rey, Georges (1992). Sensational sentences reversed. Philosophical Studies 68 (3):289-319.   (Cited by 17 | Annotation | Google)




  
Ross, Peter W. (1999). Color science and spectrum inversion: A reply to Nida-Rumelin. Consciousness and Cognition 8 (4):566-570.   (Cited by 4 | Google | More links) 







 
Ross, Peter W. (1999). Color science and spectrum inversion: Further thoughts. Consciousness and Cognition 8 (4):575-6.   (Google | More links) 




 
Saunders, Barbara (1999). One machine among many. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22 (6):969-970.   (Google)
Abstract: In this commentary I point out that Palmer mislocates the source of the inverted spectrum, misrepresents the nature of colour science, and offers no reason for prefering one colour machine over another. I conclude nonetheless that talk about “colour machines” is a step in the right direction
 
Seager, William E. (1988). Weak supervenience and materialism. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 48 (June):697-709.   (Cited by 10 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1996). Color, subjective reactions, and qualia. In Enrique Villanueva (ed.), Philosophical Issues. Atascadero: Ridgeview.   (Cited by 8 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Let me begin by indicating where I think Harman and I are in agreement. We both think that "subjective reactions" must come into an account of color, although we have different views about how they do. We both think that perceptual experience has a "presentational or representational character," and that color is represented by our visual experiences as a feature of external objects, not as a feature of our experience. Moreover, we agree that, as Harman puts it, "color is experienced as a simple basic quality, rather than a disposition or complex of causal properties." As Harman emphasized in an earlier paper, 1 what we are introspectively aware of in our experience is its presentational or representational content, not any "mental paint" which bestows this content. I shall refer to all of this as Harman's "phenomenological point." Because we agree on this, we also agree that if his characters George and Mary were spectrum inverted relative to each other, supposing that to be possible, this would have to involve their perceiving the same objects as having different properties, this despite the fact that as normal perceivers they would perceive these objects as having the same colors. And I think we agree that in this case the properties would have to be relational ones, defined or constituted by their relations to the experiences of the subject perceiving them







 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1996). Intersubjective/intrasubjective. In Sydney Shoemaker (ed.), The First-Person Perspective and Other Essays. Cambridge University Press.   (Google) 
 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1975). Phenomenal similarity. Critica 7 (October):3-37.   (Cited by 5 | Annotation | Google)




  
Shoemaker, Sydney (2006). The Frege-Schlick view. In Judith Jarvis Thomson (ed.), Content and Modality: Themes From the Philosophy of Robert Stalnaker. Oxford: Clarendon Press.   (Google) 
 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1982). The inverted spectrum. Journal of Philosophy 79 (July):357-381.   (Cited by 82 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Speaks, Jeff (forthcoming). Spectrum inversion without a difference in representation is impossible. Philosophical Studies.   (Google)
Abstract: Even if spectrum inversion of various sorts is possible, spectrum inversion without a difference in representation is not. So spectrum inversion does not pose a challenge for the intentionalist thesis that, necessarily, within a given sense modality, if two experiences are alike with respect to content, they are also alike with respect to their phenomenal character. On the contrary, reflection on variants of standard cases of spectrum inversion provides a strong argument for intentionalism. Depending on one's views about the possibility of various other sorts of spectrum inversion, the impossibility of spectrum inversion without difference in representation can also be used as an argument against a wide variety of reductive theories of mental representation.
 
Stalnaker, Robert (1999). Comparing qualia across persons. Philosophical Topics 26:385-406.   (Cited by 8 | Google) 
 
Sundstrom, Par (2002). An argument against spectrum inversion. In Sten Lindstrom & Par Sundstrom (eds.), Physicalism, Consciousness, and Modality: Essays in the Philosophy of Mind.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Takenaga, R. (2002). Inverting intentional content. Philosophical Studies 110 (3):197-229.   (Google | More links) 






 
Taylor, Daniel M. (1966). The incommunicability of content. Mind 75 (October):527-41.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Thau, Michael (2002). Spectrum inversion. In Consciousness and Cognition. Oxford University Press.   (Google) 
 
Thompson, Brad J. (2008). Representationalism and the conceivability of inverted spectra. Synthese 160 (2):203-213.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Most philosophers who have endorsed the idea that there is such a thing as phenomenal content—content that supervenes on phenomenal character—have also endorsed what I call Standard Russellianism. According to Standard Russellianism, phenomenal content is Russellian in nature, and the properties represented by perceptual experiences are mind-independent physical properties. In agreement with Sydney Shoemaker [Shoemaker, S. (1994). Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 54 249–314], I argue that Standard Russellianism is incompatible with the possibility of spectrum inversion without illusion. One defense of (...) Standard Russellianism is to hold that spectrum inversion without illusion is conceivable but not in fact possible. I argue that this response fails. As a consequence, either phenomenal content is not Russellian, or experiences do not represent mind-independent physical properties






 
Tolliver, Joseph Thomas (1999). Sensory holism and functionalism. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22 (6):972-973.   (Google)
Abstract: I defend the possibility of a functional account of the intrinsic qualities of sensory experience against the claim that functional characterization can only describe such qualities to the level of isomorphism of relational structures on those qualities. A form sensory holism might be true concerning the phenomenal, and this holism would account for some antifunctionalist intuition evoked by inverted spectrum and absent qualia arguments. Sensory holism is compatible with the correctness of functionalism about the phenomenal
 
Triplett, Timm (2006). Shoemaker on qualia, phenomenal properties and spectrum inversions. Philosophia 34 (2).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Sydney Shoemaker offers an account of color perception that attempts to do justice, within a functionalist framework, to the commonsense view that colors are properties of ordinary objects, to the existence of qualia, and to the possibility of spectrum inversions. Shoemaker posits phenomenal properties as dispositional properties of colored objects that explain how there can be intersubjective variation in the experience of a particular color. I argue that his account does not in fact allow for the description of a spectrum inversion scenario, and that it cannot sustain a functionalist relationship between an object's color and its phenomenal properties. Functionalists must, however, come to terms with Shoemaker's recognition that intersubjective spectrum shifts are possible





 
Tye, Michael (1993). Qualia, content, and the inverted spectrum. Noûs 27 (2):159-183.   (Cited by 21 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Tye, Michael (1994). Qualia, content, and the inverted spectrum. Noûs 28 (2):159-183.   (Google | More links) 




 
Viger, Christopher D. (1999). The possibility of subisomorphic experiential differences. Brain and Behavioral Sciences 22 (6):975-975.   (Cited by 8 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Palmer=s main intuition pump, the Acolor machine, @ greatly underestimates the complexity of a system isomorphic in color experience to humans. The neuroscientific picture of this complexity makes clear that the brain actively produces our experiences by processes that science can investigate, thereby supporting functionalism and leaving no (color) room for a passive observer to witness subisomorphic experiential differences






 
Webster, W. R. (2006). Human zombies are metaphysically impossible. Synthese 151 (2):297-310.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Chalmers (The Conscious Mind, Oxford Unversity Press, Oxford 1996) has argued for a form of property dualism on the basis of the concept of a zombie (which is physically identical to normals), and the concept of the inverted spectrum. He asserts that these concepts show that the facts about consciousness, such as experience or qualia, are really further facts about our world, over and above the physical facts. He claims that they are the hard part of the mind-body issue. He also claims that consciousness is a fundamental feature of the world like mass, charge, etc. He says that consciousness does not logically supervene on the physical and all current attempts to assert an identity between consciousness and the physical are just as non-reductive as his dualism. They are simply correlations and are part of the problem of the explanatory gap. In this paper, three examples of strong identities between a sensation or a quale and a physiological process are presented, which overcome these problems. They explain the identity in an a priori manner and they show that consciousness or sensations (Q) logically supervene on the physical (P), in that it is logically impossible to have P and not to have Q. In each case, the sensation was predicted and entailed by the physical. The inverted spectrum problem for consciousness is overcome and explained by a striking asymmetry in colour space. It is concluded that as some physical properties realize some sensations or qualia that human zombies are not metaphysically possible and the explanatory gap is bridged in these cases. Thus, the hard problem is overcome in these instances





 
Widmer, R.; Groning, O.; Ruffieux, P. & Groning, P. (2006). Low-temperature scanning tunneling spectroscopy on the 5-fold surface of the icosahedral alpdmn quasicrystal. Philosophical Magazine 86 (6-8):781-787.   (Google | More links) 







 
Zemplén, Gábor A. (2004). Newton's colour circle and Palmer's “normal” colour space. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 27 (1):166-168.   (Google)
Abstract: Taking the real Newtonian colour circle – and not the one Palmer depicts as Newton's – we don't have to wait 300 years for Palmer to say no to the Lockean aperçu about the inverted spectrum. One of the aims of this historical detour is to show that one's commitment about the “topology” of the colour space greatly affects Palmer's argument
 
1.7e Absent Qualia




Averill, Edward W. (1990). Functionalism, the absent qualia objection, and eliminativism. Southern Journal of Philosophy 28:449-67.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google)




  
Beckermann, Ansgar (1995). Visual information processing and phenomenal consciousness. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Ferdinand Schoningh.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: As far as an adequate understanding of phenomenal consciousness is concerned, representationalist theories of mind which are modelled on the information processing paradigm, are, as much as corresponding neurobiological or functionalist theories, confronted with a series of arguments based on inverted or absent qualia considerations. These considerations display the following pattern: assuming we had complete knowledge about the neural and functional states which subserve the occurrence of phenomenal consciousness, would it not still be conceivable that these neural states (or states with the same causal r






 
Block, Ned (1980). Are absent qualia impossible? Philosophical Review 89 (2):257-74.   (Cited by 37 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Block, Ned (1978). Troubles with functionalism. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science 9:261-325.   (Cited by 440 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: The functionalist view of the nature of the mind is now widely accepted. Like behaviorism and physicalism, functionalism seeks to answer the question "What are mental states?" I shall be concerned with identity thesis formulations of functionalism. They say, for example, that pain is a functional state, just as identity thesis formulations of physicalism say that pain is a physical state

























 
Block, Ned & Fodor, Jerry A. (1972). What psychological states are not. Philosophical Review 81 (April):159-81.   (Cited by 121 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Bogen, J. (1981). Agony in the schools. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 11 (March):1-21.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google)




  
Burwood, Stephen (1999). Philosophy of Mind. Mcgill-Queen's University Press.   (Google)
Abstract: Machine generated contents note: 1 The Cartesian legacy -- The dominant paradigm -- Cartesian dualism -- The secret life of the body -- The Cartesian theatre -- The domain of reason -- The causal relevance of the mind -- Conclusion -- Further reading --2 Reductionism and the road to functionalism -- Causation, scientific realism, and physicalism -- Reductionism and central state materialism -- Problems with central state materialism -- Modified ontological physicalism: supervenience -- Modified explanatory physicalism: the disunity of -- science picture -- Supervenient causation -- Functionalism -- Further reading --3 Computational models of mind -- Intentionality -- Rationality: the calculative account -- The computational model of mind -- Objections to the language of thought (1) -- Objections to the language of thought (2) -- Conclusion -- Further reading --4 The content of thought -- The internalist picture -- Externalism -- Singular thoughts -- Dual component theories -- Naturalistic externalism -- Teleological theories -- Conclusion -- Further reading --5 Anti-reductionist alternatives -- Interpretationalism -- Real patterns -- Direct interpretationalism -- Psychological causalism -- Modified psychological causalism -- Third-personalism and perspectivity -- The world from the point of view of the subject -- Context and culture -- Conclusion -- Further reading --6 The content of experience -- Consciousness -- The knowledge argument -- Absent qualia and inverted spectra -- Functionalist responses -- Internal monitoring -- Intentionalism -- Form and content -- The private language argument -- Further reading -- 7 Subjects of experience -- Subjectivity -- The subjective viewpoint -- Intersubjectivity -- Simulation theory -- Normativity and normality -- Expression -- Self-knowledge -- Conclusion -- Further reading --8 The embodied subject -- Mentality -- Desire -- Beyond the Cartesian body -- Metaphysical questions: multiple narratives -- Further reading -- Notes -- Bibliography -- Index.
 
Carleton, Lawrence Richard (1983). The population of china as one mind. Philosophy Research Archives 9:665-74.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Chalmers, David J. (1995). Absent qualia, fading qualia, dancing qualia. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Ferdinand Schoningh.   (Cited by 17 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: It is widely accepted that conscious experience has a physical basis. That is, the properties of experience (phenomenal properties, or qualia) systematically depend on physical properties according to some lawful relation. There are two key questions about this relation. The first concerns the strength of the laws: are they logically or metaphysically necessary, so that consciousness is nothing "over and above" the underlying physical process, or are they merely contingent laws like the law of gravity? This question about the strength of the psychophysical link is the basis for debates over physicalism and property dualism. The second question concerns the shape of the laws: precisely how do phenomenal properties depend on physical properties? What sort of physical properties enter into the laws' antecedents, for instance; consequently, what sort of physical systems can give rise to conscious experience? It is this second question that I address in this paper













 
Churchland, Paul M. & Churchland, Patricia S. (1981). Functionalism, qualia and intentionality. Philosophical Topics 12:121-32.   (Cited by 23 | Annotation | Google)




  
Conee, Earl (1985). The possibility of absent qualia. Philosophical Review 94 (July):345-66.   (Cited by 4 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Cuda, T. (1985). Against neural chauvinism. Philosophical Studies 48 (July):111-27.   (Cited by 6 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Davis, Lawrence H. (1982). Functionalism and absent qualia. Philosophical Studies 41 (March):231-49.   (Cited by 7 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Dempsey, L. (2002). Chalmers's fading and dancing qualia: Consciousness and the "hard problem". Southwest Philosophy Review 18 (2):65-80.   (Google) 
 
Doore, G. (1981). Functionalism and absent qualia. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 59 (March):387-402.   (Annotation | Google | More links)




 







 
Dretske, Fred (1996). Absent qualia. Mind and Language 11 (1):78-85.   (Cited by 8 | Google | More links) 




 
Elugardo, Reinaldo (1983). Functionalism and the absent qualia argument. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 13 (June):161-80.   (Google) 
 
Elugardo, Reinaldo (1983). Functionalism, homunculi-heads and absent qualia. Dialogue 21 (March):47-56.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Hardcastle, Valerie Gray (1996). Functionalism's response to the problem of absent qualia. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3 (4):357-73.   (Google) 
 
Hershfield, Jeffrey (2002). A note on the possibility of silicon brains and fading qualia. Journal of Consciousness Studies 9 (7):25-31.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Hill, Christopher S. (1991). Introspection and the skeptic. In Sensations: A Defense of Type Materialism. Cambridge University Press.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Hill, Christopher S. (1991). The failings of functionalism. In Sensations: A Defense of Type Materialism. Cambridge University Press.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Jacoby, H. (1990). Empirical functionalism and conceivability arguments. Philosophical Psychology 2 (3):271-82.   (Annotation | Google)





Abstract: Functionalism, the philosophical theory that defines mental states in terms of their causal relations to stimuli, overt behaviour, and other inner mental states, has often been accused of being unable to account for the qualitative character of our experimential states. Many times such objections to functionalism take the form of conceivability arguments. One is asked to imagine situations where organisms who are in a functional state that is claimed to be a particular experience either have the qualitative character of that experience altered or absent altogether. Many of these arguments are surprisingly advanced by materialist philosophers. I argue that if the conceivability arguments were successful against functionalism, then they would be successful against their alternative materialist views as well. So the conceivability arguments alone do not provide a good reason for materialists to abandon functionalism. I further argue that functionalism is best understood to be an empirical theory, and if it is so understood then the conceivability arguments have no force against it at all. A further consequence that emerges is that on an empirical functionalist view, qualia, if real, are properties in the domain of psychology
 
Juhl, Cory F. (1998). Conscious experience and the nontrivality principle. Philosophical Studies 91 (1):91-101.   (Google) 
 
Levine, Joseph (1988). Absent and inverted qualia revisited. Mind and Language 3:271-87.   (Cited by 5 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Levin, Janet (1985). Functionalism and the argument from conceivability. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 11:85-104.   (Cited by 11 | Annotation | Google)




  
Lycan, William G. (1987). Homunctionalism and qualia. In Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Mallah, Jacques (ms). The partial brain thought experiment: Partial consciousness and its implications.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The ‘Fading Qualia’ thought experiment of Chalmers purports to show that computationalism is very probably true even if dualism is true by considering a series of brains, with biological parts increasingly substituted for by artificial but functionally analagous parts in small steps, and arguing that consciousness would not plausibly vanish in either a gradual or sudden way. This defense of computationalism inspired an attack on computationalism by Bishop, who argued that a similar series of substitutions by parts that have the correct physical activity but not the correct causal relationships must likewise preserve consciousness, purportedly showing that ‘Counterfactuals Cannot Count’ and if so ruining a necessary condition for computation to meaningfully distinguish between physical systems. In this paper, the case in which a series of parts are simply removed and substituted for only by imposing the correct boundary conditions to exactly preserve the functioning of the remaining partial brain is described. It is argued that consciousness must gradually vanish in this case, not by fading but by becoming more and more partial. This supports the non-centralized nature of consciousness, tends to support the plausibility of physicalism against dualism, and provides the proper counterargument to Bishop’s contention. It also provides an avenue of attack against the “Fading Qualia” argument for those who remain dualists





 
Marras, Ausonio (1993). Materialism, functionalism, and supervenient qualia. Dialogue 32 (3):475-92.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google)




  
Nussbaum, Charles (2003). Another look at functionalism and the emotions. Brain and Mind 4 (3):353-383.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Two chronic problems have plagued functionalism in the philosophy of mind. The first is the chauvinism/liberalism dilemma, the second the absent qualia problem. The first problem is addressed by blocking excessively liberal counterexamples at a level of functional abstraction that is high enough to avoid chauvinism. This argument introduces the notion of emotional functional organization (EFO). The second problem is addressed by granting Block's skeptical conclusions with respect to mentality as such, while arguing that qualitative experience is a concomitant of human mentality considered as a special case: a system with EFO implemented in an organic substrate







 
Pineda, David (2001). Functionalism and nonreductive physicalism. Theoria 16 (40):43-63.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Most philosophers of mind nowadays espouse two metaphysical views: Nonreductive Physicalism and the causal efficacy of the mental. Throughout this work I will refer to the conjunction of both claims as the Causal Autonomy of the Mental. Nevertheless, this position is threatened by a number of difficulties which are far more serious than one would imagine given the broad consensus that it has generated during the last decades. This paper purports to offer a careful examination of some of these difficulties and show the considerable efforts that one has to undertake in order to try to overcome them. The difficulties examined will concern only metaphysical problems common to all special science properties but not specific of mental properties. So, in proposing a functionalist version of Nonreductive Physicalism in what follows, I will not attempt to answer to well known objections such as the absent qualia argument and the like. This should not be interpreted as a limitation! in the scope of this work. On the contrary, in dealing with more general objections we will try to evaluate a position which entails (under common assumptions) the Causal Autonomy of the Mental, namely: Nonreductive Physicalism plus the causal efficacy of special science properties





 
Sayan, E. (1988). A closer look at the chinese nation argument. Philosophy Research Archives 13:129-36.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Shoemaker, Sydney (1981). Absent qualia are impossible -- a reply to Block. Philosophical Review 90 (October):581-99.   (Cited by 17 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1975). Functionalism and qualia. Philosophical Studies 27 (May):291-315.   (Cited by 95 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
Tolliver, Joseph Thomas (1999). Sensory holism and functionalism. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22 (6):972-973.   (Google)
Abstract: I defend the possibility of a functional account of the intrinsic qualities of sensory experience against the claim that functional characterization can only describe such qualities to the level of isomorphism of relational structures on those qualities. A form sensory holism might be true concerning the phenomenal, and this holism would account for some antifunctionalist intuition evoked by inverted spectrum and absent qualia arguments. Sensory holism is compatible with the correctness of functionalism about the phenomenal
 
Tye, Michael (2006). Absent qualia and the mind-body problem. Philosophical Review 115 (2):139-168.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links)
Abstract: At the very heart of the mind-body problem is the question of the nature of consciousness. It is consciousness, and in particular _phenomenal_ consciousness, that makes the mind-body relation so deeply perplexing. Many philosophers hold that no defi nition of phenomenal consciousness is possible: any such putative defi nition would automatically use the concept of phenomenal consciousness and thus render the defi nition circular. The usual view is that the concept of phenomenal consciousness is one that must be explained by means of specifi c examples and associated comments






 
Tye, Michael (1993). Blindsight, the absent qualia hypothesis, and the mystery of consciousness. In Christopher Hookway (ed.), Philosophy and the Cognitive Sciences. Cambridge University Press.   (Cited by 11 | Annotation | Google)




  
Van Gulick, Robert (1999). Out of sight but not out of mind: Isomorphism and absent qualia. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22 (6):974-974.   (Google)
Abstract: The isomorphism constraint places plausible limits on the use of third-person evidence to explain color experience but poses no difficulty for functionalists; they themselves argue for just such limits. Palmer's absent qualia claim is supported by neither the Color Machine nor Color Room examples. The nature of color experience depends on relations external to the color space, as well as internal to it
 
van Gulick, Robert (1993). Understanding the phenomenal mind: Are we all just armadillos? In Martin Davies & Glyn W. Humphreys (eds.), Consciousness: Psychological and Philosophical Essays. Blackwell.   (Cited by 51 | Annotation | Google)




  
van Gulick, Robert (1989). What difference does consciousness make? Philosophical Topics 17 (1):211-30.   (Annotation | Google)




  
White, Nicholas P. (1985). Professor Shoemaker and the so-called `qualia' of experience. Philosophical Studies 47 (May):369-383.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google)




  
1.7f Functionalism and Qualia




Block, Ned (2008). Consciousness and cognitive access. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 108 (1pt3):289-317.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: This article concerns the interplay between two issues that involve both philosophy and neuroscience: whether the content of phenomenal consciousness is 'rich' or 'sparse', whether phenomenal consciousness goes beyond cognitive access, and how it would be possible for there to be evidence one way or the other





 
Brown, Mark T. (1983). Functionalism and sensations. Auslegung 10:218-28.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Chalmers, David J. (1995). Absent qualia, fading qualia, dancing qualia. In Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Ferdinand Schoningh.   (Cited by 17 | Annotation | Google | More links)





Abstract: It is widely accepted that conscious experience has a physical basis. That is, the properties of experience (phenomenal properties, or qualia) systematically depend on physical properties according to some lawful relation. There are two key questions about this relation. The first concerns the strength of the laws: are they logically or metaphysically necessary, so that consciousness is nothing "over and above" the underlying physical process, or are they merely contingent laws like the law of gravity? This question about the strength of the psychophysical link is the basis for debates over physicalism and property dualism. The second question concerns the shape of the laws: precisely how do phenomenal properties depend on physical properties? What sort of physical properties enter into the laws' antecedents, for instance; consequently, what sort of physical systems can give rise to conscious experience? It is this second question that I address in this paper













 
Clark, Andy (2000). A case where access implies qualia? Analysis 60 (1):30-37.   (Cited by 19 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Block (1995) famously warns against the confusion of










 
Dumpleton, S. (1988). Sensation and function. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 66 (September):376-89.   (Google | More links) 








 
Eshelman, L. J. (1977). Functionalism, sensations, and materialism. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 7 (June):255-74.   (Google) 
 
Georgiev, Danko (ms). Chalmers' principle of organizational invariance makes consciousness fundamental but meaningless spectator of its own drama.   (Google | More links)
Abstract: It is argued that if consciousness is a fundamental ingredient of reality then no any psychophysical law such as Chalmers' principle of organizational invariance is needed to keep coherence between experience and function (conscious action). Indeed Chalmers' proposal suggests epiphenomenal consciousness and is regress to a nineteenth century absurd philosophy. The quantum mechanics is the most successful current physical theory and can naturally accommodate consciousness without violation of physical laws





 
Graham, George & Stephens, G. Lynn (1985). Are qualia a pain in the neck for functionalists? American Philosophical Quarterly 22 (January):73-80.   (Cited by 9 | Annotation | Google)




  
Greenberg, William J. (1998). On Chalmers' "principle of organizational invariance" and his "dancing qualia" and "fading qualia" thought experiments. Journal of Consciousness Studies 5 (1):53-58.   (Google) 
 
Hill, Christopher S. (1991). The failings of functionalism. In Sensations: A Defense of Type Materialism. Cambridge University Press.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Horgan, Terence E. (1984). Functionalism, qualia, and the inverted spectrum. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 44 (June):453-69.   (Cited by 10 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Huebner, Bryce; Bruno, Michael & Sarkissian, Hagop (2010). What does the nation of china think about phenomenal states? Review of Philosophy and Psychology 1 (2).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: Critics of functionalism about the mind often rely on the intuition that collectivities cannot be conscious in motivating their positions. In this paper, we consider the merits of appealing to the intuition that there is nothing that it’s like to be a collectivity. We demonstrate that collective mentality is not an affront to commonsense, and we report evidence that demonstrates that the intuition that there is nothing that it’s like to be a collectivity is, to some extent, culturally specific rather than universally held. This being the case, we argue that mere appeal to the intuitive implausibility of collective consciousness does not offer any genuine insight into the nature of mentality in general, nor the nature of consciousness in particular





 
Jarrett, Greg (1996). Analyzing mental demonstratives. Philosophical Studies 84 (1):49-62.   (Google | More links) 




 
Levine, Joseph (1999). Philosophy as massage: Seeking relief from conscious tension. Philosophical Topics 26:159-78.   (Cited by 1 | Google) 
 
Littlejohn, Clayton (2009). On the coherence of inversion. Acta Analytica 24 (2).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: In this paper, I shall evaluate a strategy recently used to try to demonstrate the impossibility of behaviorally undetectable spectrum inversion. After showing that the impossibility proof proves too much, I shall identify where it goes wrong. In turn, I shall explain why someone attracted to functionalist and representationalist assumptions might rightly remain agnostic about the possibility of inversion





 
Lycan, William G. (1981). Form, function and feel. Journal of Philosophy 78 (January):24-50.   (Cited by 32 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Lycan, William G. (1987). Homunctionalism and qualia. In Consciousness. MIT Press.   (Annotation | Google)




  
Macpherson, Fiona (2007). Synaesthesia. In Mario de Caro, Francesco Ferretti & Massimo Marraffa (eds.), Cartographies of the Mind: Philosophy and Psychology in Intersection. Kleuwer.   (Google | More links) 




 
Moor, James H. (1988). Testing robots for qualia. In Herbert R. Otto & James A. Tuedio (eds.), Perspectives on Mind. Kluwer.   (Cited by 1 | Annotation | Google)




  
Nemirow, Laurence (1979). Functionalism and the Subjective Quality of Experience. Dissertation, Stanford University   (Cited by 2 | Google) 
 
Pelczar, Michael (2008). On an argument for functional invariance. Minds and Machines 18 (3).   (Google | More links)
Abstract: The principle of functional invariance states that it is a natural law that conscious beings with the same functional organization have the same quality of conscious experience. A group of arguments in support of this principle are rejected, on the grounds that they establish at most only the weaker intra-subjective principle that any two stages in the life of a single conscious being that duplicate one another in terms of functional organization also duplicate one another in terms of quality of phenomenal experience






 
Pettit, Philip (2003). Looks as powers. Philosophical Issues 13 (1):221-52.   (Cited by 10 | Google | More links)
Abstract: Although they may differ on the reason why, many philosophers hold that it is a priori that an object is red if and only if it is such as to look red to normal observers in normal conditions






 
Rey, Georges (1994). Wittgenstein, computationalism, and qualia. In Roberto Casati, B. Smith & Stephen L. White (eds.), Philosophy and the Cognitive Sciences. Holder-Pichler-Tempsky.   (Cited by 3 | Annotation | Google)




  
Seager, William E. (1983). Functionalism, qualia and causation. Mind 92 (April):174-88.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 





 
Shoemaker, Sydney (1994). The first-person perspective. Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association 68 (2):7-22.   (Cited by 11 | Annotation | Google)




  
Van Gulick, Robert (2007). Functionalism and qualia. In Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell.   (Google) 
 
van Heuveln, B.; Dietrich, Eric & Oshima, M. (1998). Let's dance! The equivocation in Chalmers' dancing qualia argument. Minds and Machines 8 (2):237-249.   (Cited by 3 | Google | More links) 







 
van Gulick, Robert (1988). Qualia, functional equivalence and computation. In Herbert R. Otto & James A. Tuedio (eds.), Perspectives on Mind. Kluwer.   (Annotation | Google)




  
White, Stephen L. (1986). Curse of the qualia. Synthese 68 (August):333-68.   (Cited by 30 | Annotation | Google | More links)




 




 
White, Stephen L. (1989). Transcendentalism and its discontents. Philosophical Topics 17 (1):231-61.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google)




  
Wright, Edmond L. (1993). More qualia trouble for functionalism: The Smythies TV-Hood analogy. Synthese 97 (3):365-82.   (Cited by 1 | Google | More links)
Abstract:   It is the purpose of this article to explicate the logical implications of a television analogy for perception, first suggested by John R. Smythies (1956). It aims to show not only that one cannot escape the postulation of qualia that have an evolutionary purpose not accounted for within a strong functionalist theory, but also that it undermines other anti-representationalist arguments as well as some representationalist ones





 
Zuboff, Arnold (1994). What is a mind? Midwest Studies in Philosophy 19:183-205.   (Cited by 2 | Annotation | Google)




  




Use of this site is subject to terms & conditions.
 (c) adrian.orozco.jimenez.acosta.gamez 0-9999
 ipt Menu by Deluxe-Menu.com

  
